"They say Aslan is on the move - perhaps has already landed."

And now a very curious thing happened. None of the children knew who Aslan was any more than
you do; but the moment the Beaver had spoken these words everyone felt quite different. Perhaps it
has sometimes happened to you in a dream that someone says something which you don't understand
but in the dream it feels as if it had some enormous meaning - either a terrifying one which turns the
whole dream into a nightmare or else a lovely meaning too lovely to put into words, which makes the
dream so beautiful that you remember it all your life and are always wishing you could get into that
dream again. It was like that now. At the name of Aslan each one of the children felt something jump

"It's no good, Son of Adam," said Mr Beaver, "no good your trying, of all people. But now that
Aslan is on the move-"

"Oh, yes! Tell us about Aslan!" said several voices at once; for once again that strange feeling - like
the first signs of spring, like good news, had come over them.

"Who is Aslan?" asked Susan.

"Aslan?" said Mr Beaver. "Why, don't you know? He's the King. He's the Lord of the whole wood,
but not often here, you understand. Never in my time or my father's time. But the word has reached
us that he has come back. He is in Narnia at this moment. He'll settle the White Queen all right. It is
he, not you, that will save Mr Tumnus."

Wrong will be right, when Aslan comes in sight,

"Aslan a man!" said Mr Beaver sternly. "Certainly not. I tell you he is the King of the wood and the
son of the great Emperor-beyond-the-Sea. Don't you know who is the King of Beasts? Aslan is a lion
- the Lion, the great Lion."

"That you will, dearie, and no mistake," said Mrs Beaver; "if there's anyone who can appear before
Aslan without their knees knocking, they're either braver than most or else just silly."

"The quickest way you can help him is by going to meet Aslan," said Mr Beaver, "once he's with us,
then we can begin doing things. Not that we don't need you too. For that's another of the old rhymes:

So things must be drawing near their end now he's come and you've come. We've heard of Aslan
coming into these parts before - long ago, nobody can say when. But there's never been any of your
race here before."

"Only Aslan," said Mr Beaver, "we must go on and meet him. That's our only chance now."

"It seems to me, my dears," said Mrs Beaver, "that it is very important to know just when he slipped
away. How much he can tell her depends on how much he heard. For instance, had we started talking
of Aslan before he left? If not, then we may do very well, for she won't know that Aslan has come to
Narnia, or that we are meeting him, and will be quite off her guard as far as that is concerned."

"I don't remember his being here when we were talking about Aslan -" began Peter, but Lucy
interrupted him.

"Oh yes, he was," she said miserably; "don't you remember, it was he who asked whether the Witch
couldn't turn Aslan into stone too?"

"Worse and worse," said Mr Beaver, "and the next thing is this. Was he still here when I told you
that the place for meeting Aslan was the Stone Table?"

"Because, if he was," continued Mr Beaver, "then she'll simply sledge down in that direction and get
between us and the Stone Table and catch us on our way down. In fact we shall be cut off from
Aslan. "

AND now of course you want to know what had happened to Edmund. He had eaten his share of the
dinner, but he hadn't really enjoyed it because he was thinking all the time about Turkish Delight and there's nothing that spoils the taste of good ordinary food half so much as the memory of bad
magic food. And he had heard the conversation, and hadn't enjoyed it much either, because he kept
on thinking that the others were taking no notice of him and trying to give him the cold shoulder.
They weren't, but he imagined it. And then he had listened until Mr Beaver told them about Aslan
and until he had heard the whole arrangement for meeting Aslan at the Stone Table. It was then that
he began very quietly to edge himself under the curtain which hung over the door. For the mention of
Aslan gave him a mysterious and horrible feeling just as it gave the others a mysterious and lovely
feeling.

is the rightful Queen really. Anyway, she'll be better than that awful Aslan!" At least, that was the
excuse he made in his own mind for what he was doing. It wasn't a very good excuse, however, for
deep down inside him he really knew that the White Witch was bad and cruel.

The relief which Edmund felt was so great that in spite of the cold he suddenly got warm all over
right down to his toes, and at the same time there came into his head what seemed a perfectly lovely
idea. "Probably," he thought, "this is the great Lion Aslan that they were all talking about. She's
caught him already and turned him into stone. So that's the end of all their fine ideas about him!
Pooh! Who's afraid of Aslan?"

childish. He took a stump of lead pencil out of his pocket and scribbled a moustache on the lion's
upper lip and then a pair of spectacles on its eyes. Then he said, "Yah! Silly old Aslan! How do you
like being a stone? You thought yourself mighty fine, didn't you?" But in spite of the scribbles on it
the face of the great stone beast still looked so terrible, and sad, and noble, staring up in the
moonlight, that Edmund didn't really get any fun out of jeering at it. He turned away and began to
cross the courtyard.

"What! Aslan?" cried the Queen, "Aslan! Is this true? If I find you have lied to me -"

"I've come at last," said he. "She has kept me out for a long time, but I have got in at last. Aslan is
on the move. The Witch's magic is weakening."

"This is no thaw," said the dwarf, suddenly stopping. "This is Spring. What are we to do? Your
winter has been destroyed, I tell you! This is Aslan's doing."

They had been just as surprised as Edmund when they saw the winter vanishing and the whole wood
passing in a few hours or so from January to May. They hadn't even known for certain (as the Witch
did) that this was what would happen when Aslan came to Narnia. But they all knew that it was her
spells which had produced the endless winter; and therefore they all knew when this magic spring
began that something had gone wrong, and badly wrong, with the Witch's schemes. And after the
thaw had been going on for some time they all realised that the Witch would no longer be able to use
her sledge. After that they didn't hurry so much and they allowed themselves more rests and longer
ones. They were pretty tired by now of course; but not what I'd call bitterly tired - only slow and
feeling very dreamy and quiet inside as one does when one is coming to the end of a long day in the
open. Susan had a slight blister on one heel.

Aslan stood in the centre of a crowd of creatures who had grouped themselves round him in the
shape of a half-moon. There were Tree-Women there and Well-Women (Dryads and Naiads as they
used to be called in our world) who had stringed instruments; it was they who had made the music.
There were four great centaurs. The horse part of them was like huge English farm horses, and the
man part was like stern but beautiful giants. There was also a unicorn, and a bull with the head of a
man, and a pelican, and an eagle, and a great Dog. And next to Aslan stood two leopards of whom
one carried his crown and the other his standard.

But as for Aslan himself, the Beavers and the children didn't know what to do or say when they saw
him. People who have not been in Narnia sometimes think that a thing cannot be good and terrible at
the same time. If the children had ever thought so, they were cured of it now. For when they tried to
look at Aslan's face they just caught a glimpse of the golden mane and the great, royal, solemn,
overwhelming eyes; and then they found they couldn't look at him and went all trembly.

"We have come - Aslan."

"Welcome, Peter, Son of Adam," said Aslan. "Welcome, Susan and Lucy, Daughters of Eve.
Welcome He-Beaver and She-Beaver."

"But where is the fourth?" asked Aslan.

"He has tried to betray them and joined the White Witch, O Aslan," said Mr Beaver. And then
something made Peter say,

"That was partly my fault, Aslan. I was angry with him and I think that helped him to go wrong."

And Aslan said nothing either to excuse Peter or to blame him but merely stood looking at him with
his great unchanging eyes. And it seemed to all of them that there was nothing to be said.

"Please - Aslan," said Lucy, "can anything be done to save Edmund?"

"All shall be done," said Aslan. "But it may be harder than you think." And then he was silent again
for some time. Up to that moment Lucy had been thinking how royal and strong and peaceful his face
looked; now it suddenly came into her head that he looked sad as well. But next minute that
expression was quite gone. The Lion shook his mane and clapped his paws together ("Terrible paws,"
thought Lucy, "if he didn't know how to velvet them!") and said,

When the girls had gone Aslan laid his paw - and though it was velveted it was very heavy - on
Peter's shoulder and said, "Come, Son of Adam, and I will show you a far-off sight of the castle
where you are to be King."

"That, O Man," said Aslan, "is Cair Paravel of the four thrones, in one of which you must sit as
King. I show it to you because you are the first-born and you will be High King over all the rest."

"It is your sister's horn," said Aslan to Peter in a low voice; so low as to be almost a purr, if it is not
disrespectful to think of a Lion purring.

For a moment Peter did not understand. Then, when he saw all the other creatures start forward and
heard Aslan say with a wave of his paw, "Back! Let the Prince win his spurs," he did understand, and
set off running as hard as he could to the pavilion. And there he saw a dreadful sight.

"Quick! Quick!" shouted the voice of Aslan. "Centaurs! Eagles! I see another wolf in the thickets.
There - behind you. He has just darted away. After him, all of you. He will be going to his mistress.
Now is your chance to find the Witch and rescue the fourth Son of Adam." And instantly with a
thunder of hoofs and beating of wings a dozen or so of the swiftest creatures disappeared into the
gathering darkness.

Peter, still out of breath, turned and saw Aslan close at hand.

"You have forgotten to clean your sword," said Aslan.

"Hand it to me and kneel, Son of Adam," said Aslan. And when Peter had done so he struck him
with the flat of the blade and said, "Rise up, Sir Peter Wolf's-Bane. And, whatever happens, never
forget to wipe your sword."

"What difference would that make now that He is here?" said the dwarf. He did not dare, even now,
to mention the name of Aslan to his mistress.

Presently the centaurs and unicorns and deer and birds (they were of course the rescue party which
Aslan had sent in the last chapter) all set off to go back to the Stone Table, carrying Edmund with
them. But if they could have seen what happened in that valley after they had gone, I think they might
have been surprised.

When the other children woke up next morning (they had been sleeping on piles of cushions in the
pavilion) the first thing they heard -from Mrs Beaver - was that their brother had been rescued and
brought into camp late last night; and was at that moment with Aslan. As soon as they had
breakfasted4 they all went out, and there they saw Aslan and Edmund walking together in the dewy
grass, apart from the rest of the court. There is no need to tell you (and no one ever heard) what Aslan
was saying, but it was a conversation which Edmund never forgot. As the others drew nearer Aslan
turned to meet them, bringing Edmund with him.

Edmund shook hands with each of the others and said to each of them in turn, "I'm sorry," and
everyone said, "That's all right." And then everyone wanted very hard to say something which would
make it quite clear that they were all friends with him again -something ordinary and natural -and of
course no one could think of anything in the world to say. But before they had time to feel really
awkward one of the leopards approached Aslan and said,

"Let him approach," said Aslan.

"What is your message, Son of Earth?" asked Aslan.

"Peace, Beaver," said Aslan. "All names will soon be restored to their proper owners. In the
meantime we will not dispute about them. Tell your mistress, Son of Earth, that I grant her safe

A few minutes later the Witch herself walked out on to the top of the hill and came straight across
and stood before Aslan. The three children who had not seen her before felt shudders running down
their backs at the sight of her face; and there were low growls among all the animals present. Though
it was bright sunshine everyone felt suddenly cold. The only two people present who seemed to be
quite at their ease were Aslan and the Witch herself. It was the oddest thing to see those two faces the golden face and the dead-white face so close together. Not that the Witch looked Aslan exactly in
his eyes; Mrs Beaver particularly noticed this.

"You have a traitor there, Aslan," said the Witch. Of course everyone present knew that she meant
Edmund. But Edmund had got past thinking about himself after all he'd been through and after the
talk he'd had that morning. He just went on looking at Aslan. It didn't seem to matter what the Witch
said.

"Well," said Aslan. "His offence was not against you."

"Let us say I have forgotten it," answered Aslan gravely. "Tell us of this Deep Magic."

"Peace, Beaver," said Aslan, with a very low growl. "And so," continued the Witch, "that human
creature is mine. His life is forfeit to me. His blood is my property."

"It is very true," said Aslan, "I do not deny it."

"Oh, Aslan!" whispered Susan in the Lion's ear, "can't we - I mean, you won't, will you? Can't we do
something about the Deep Magic? Isn't there something you can work against it?"

"Work against the Emperor's Magic?" said Aslan, turning to her with something like a frown on his
face. And nobody ever made that suggestion to him again.

Edmund was on the other side of Aslan, looking all the time at Aslan's face. He felt a choking
feeling and wondered if he ought to say something; but a moment later he felt that he was not
expected to do anything except to wait, and do what he was told.

"Fall back, all of you," said Aslan, "and I will talk to the Witch alone."

his back to the others looking out at the distant sea. The Beavers stood holding each other's paws with
their heads bowed. The centaurs stamped uneasily with their hoofs. But everyone became perfectly
still in the end, so that you noticed even small sounds like a bumble-bee flying past, or the birds in
the forest down below them, or the wind rustling the leaves. And still the talk between Aslan and the
White Witch went on.

At last they heard Aslan's voice, "You can all come back," he said. "I have settled the matter. She
has renounced the claim on your brother's blood." And all over the hill there was a noise as if
everyone had been holding their breath and had now begun breathing again, and then a murmur of
talk.

"Haa-a-arrh!" roared Aslan, half rising from his throne; and his great mouth opened wider and wider
and the roar grew louder and louder, and the Witch, after staring for a moment with her lips wide
apart, picked up her skirts and fairly ran for her life.

As soon as the Witch had gone Aslan said, "We must move from this place at once, it will be wanted
for other purposes. We shall encamp tonight at the Fords of Beruna.

During the first part of the journey Aslan explained to Peter his plan of campaign. "As soon as she
has finished her business in these parts," he said, "the Witch and her crew will almost certainly fall
back to her House and prepare for a siege. You may or may not be able to cut her off and prevent her
from reaching it." He then went on to outline two plans of battle - one for fighting the Witch and her
people in the wood and another for assaulting her castle. And all the time he was advising Peter how
to conduct the operations, saying things like, "You must put your Centaurs in such and such a place"
or "You must post scouts to see that she doesn't do so-and-so," till at last Peter said,

"But you will be there yourself, Aslan."

It was still afternoon when they came down to a place where the river valley had widened out and
the river was broad and shallow. This was the Fords of Beruna and Aslan gave orders to halt on this
side of the water. But Peter said,

Aslan, who seemed to have been thinking about something else, roused himself with a shake of his
magnificent mane and said, "Eh? What's that?" Peter said it all over again.

"No," said Aslan in a dull voice, as if it didn't matter. "No. She will not make an attack to-night."
And then he sighed deeply. But presently he added, "All the same it was well thought of. That is how
a soldier ought to think. But it doesn't really matter." So they proceeded to pitch their camp.

Aslan's mood affected everyone that evening. Peter was feeling uncomfortable too at the idea of
fighting the battle on his own; the news that Aslan might not be there had come as a great shock to
him. Supper that evening was a quiet meal. Everyone felt how different it had been last night or even
that morning. It was as if the good times, having just begun, were already drawing to their end.

"Something about Aslan," said Lucy. "Either some dreadful thing is going to happen to him, or
something dreadful that he's going to do."

He led them up the steep slope out of the river valley and then slightly to the right - apparently by
the very same route which they had used that afternoon in coming from the Hill of the Stone Table.
On and on he led them, into dark shadows and out into pale moonlight, getting their feet wet with the
heavy dew. He looked somehow different from the Aslan they knew. His tail and his head hung low
and he walked slowly as if he were very, very tired. Then, when they were crossing a wide open
place where there where no shadows for them to hide in, he stopped and looked round. It was no
good trying to run away so they came towards him. When they were closer he said,

"We couldn't sleep," said Lucy - and then felt sure that she need say no more and that Aslan knew all
they had been thinking.

"Well -" said Aslan, and seemed to be thinking. Then he said, "I should be glad of company tonight.
Yes, you may come, if you will promise to stop when I tell you, and after that leave me to go on
alone."

"Aslan! Dear Aslan!" said Lucy, "what is wrong? Can't you tell us?"

"Are you ill, dear Aslan?" asked Susan.

"No," said Aslan. "I am sad and lonely. Lay your hands on my mane so that I can feel you are there
and let us walk like that."

And so the girls did what they would never have dared to do without his permission, but what they
had longed to do ever since they first saw him buried their cold hands in the beautiful sea of fur and
stroked it and, so doing, walked with him. And presently they saw that they were going with him up
the slope of the hill on which the Stone Table stood. They went up at the side where the trees came
furthest up, and when they got to the last tree (it was one that had some bushes about it) Aslan
stopped and said,

Lucy and Susan held their breaths waiting for Aslan's roar and his spring upon his enemies. But it
never came. Four Hags, grinning and leering, yet also (at first) hanging back and half afraid of what
they had to do, had approached him. "Bind him, I say!" repeated the White Witch. The Hags made a
dart at him and shrieked with triumph when they found that he made no resistance at all. Then others
- evil dwarfs and apes - rushed in to help them, and between them they rolled the huge Lion over on
his back and tied all his four paws together, shouting and cheering as if they had done something
brave, though, had the Lion chosen, one of those paws could have been the death of them all. But he
made no noise, even when the enemies, straining and tugging, pulled the cords so tight that they cut
into his flesh. Then they began to drag him towards the Stone Table.

Another roar of mean laughter went up from her followers as an ogre with a pair of shears came
forward and squatted down by Aslan's head. Snip-snip-snip went the shears and masses of curling
gold began to fall to the ground. Then the ogre stood back and the children, watching from their
hiding-place, could see the face of Aslan looking all small and different without its mane. The
enemies also saw the difference.

And they surged round Aslan, jeering at him, saying things like "Puss, Puss! Poor Pussy," and "How
many mice have you caught today, Cat?" and "Would you like a saucer of milk, Pussums?"

"Oh, how can they?" said Lucy, tears streaming down her cheeks. "The brutes, the brutes!" for now
that the first shock was over the shorn face of Aslan looked to her braver, and more beautiful, and
more patient than ever.

When once Aslan had been tied (and tied so that he was really a mass of cords) on the flat stone, a
hush fell on the crowd. Four Hags, holding four torches, stood at the corners of the Table. The Witch
bared her arms as she had bared them the previous night when it had been Edmund instead of Aslan.
Then she began to whet her knife. It looked to the children, when the gleam of the torchlight fell on
it, as if the knife were made of stone, not of steel, and it was of a strange and evil shape.

As last she drew near. She stood by Aslan's head. Her face was working and twitching with passion,
but his looked up at the sky, still quiet, neither angry nor afraid, but a little sad. Then, just before she
gave the blow, she stooped down and said in a quivering voice,

At this moment the children were for a few seconds in very great danger. For with wild cries and a
noise of skirling pipes and shrill horns blowing, the whole of that vile rabble came sweeping off the
hill-top and down the slope right past their hiding-place. They felt the Spectres go by them like a cold
wind and they felt the ground shake beneath them under the galloping feet of the Minotaurs; and
overhead there went a flurry of foul wings and a blackness of vultures and giant bats. At any other
time they would have trembled with fear; but now the sadness and shame and horror of Aslan's death
so filled their minds that they hardly thought of it.

I hope no one who reads this book has been quite as miserable as Susan and Lucy were that night;
but if you have been - if you've been up all night and cried till you have no more tears left in you you will know that there comes in the end a sort of quietness. You feel as if nothing was ever going
to happen again. At any rate that was how it felt to these two. Hours and hours seemed to go by in
this dead calm, and they hardly noticed that they were getting colder and colder. But at last Lucy
noticed two other things. One was that the sky on the east side of the hill was a little less dark than it
had been an hour ago. The other was some tiny movement going on in the grass at her feet. At first
she took no interest in this. What did it matter? Nothing mattered now! But at last she saw that
whatever-it-was had begun to move up the upright stones of the Stone Table. And now whateverthey-were were moving about on Aslan's body. She peered closer. They were little grey things.

The girls cleared away the remains of the gnawed ropes. Aslan looked more like himself without
them. Every moment his dead face looked nobler, as the light grew and they could see it better.

They walked to the eastern edge of the hill and looked down. The one big star had almost
disappeared. The country all looked dark grey, but beyond, at the very end of the world, the sea
showed pale. The sky began to turn red. They walked to ands fro more times than they could count
between the dead Aslan and the eastern ridge, trying to keep warm; and oh, how tired their legs felt.
Then at last, as they stood for a moment looking out towards they sea and Cair Paravel (which they
could now just make out) the red turned to gold along the line where the sea and the sky met and very
slowly up came the edge of the sun. At that moment they heard from behind them a loud noise - a
great cracking, deafening noise as if a giant had broken a giant's plate.

The rising of the sun had made everything look so different - all colours and shadows were changed
that for a moment they didn't see the important thing. Then they did. The Stone Table was broken
into two pieces by a great crack that ran down it from end to end; and there was no Aslan.

"Yes!" said a great voice behind their backs. "It is more magic." They looked round. There, shining
in the sunrise, larger than they had seen him before, shaking his mane (for it had apparently grown
again) stood Aslan himself.

"Oh, Aslan!" cried both the children, staring up at him, almost as much frightened as they were glad.

"Aren't you dead then, dear Aslan?" said Lucy.

"Not now," said Aslan.

"You're not - not a - ?" asked Susan in a shaky voice. She couldn't bring herself to say the word
ghost. Aslan stooped his golden head and licked her forehead. The warmth of his breath and a rich
sort of smell that seemed to hang about his hair came all over her.

"Oh, you're real, you're real! Oh, Aslan!" cried Lucy, and both girls flung themselves upon him and
covered him with kisses.

"It means," said Aslan, "that though the Witch knew the Deep Magic, there is a magic deeper still

"Oh, children," said the Lion, "I feel my strength coming back to me. Oh, children, catch me if you
can!" He stood for a second, his eyes very bright, his limbs quivering, lashing himself with his tail.
Then he made a leap high over their heads and landed on the other side of the Table. Laughing,
though she didn't know why, Lucy scrambled over it to reach him. Aslan leaped again. A mad chase
began. Round and round the hill-top he led them, now hopelessly out of their reach, now letting them
almost catch his tail, now diving between them, now tossing them in the air with his huge and
beautifully velveted paws and catching them again, and now stopping unexpectedly so that all three
of them rolled over together in a happy laughing heap of fur and arms and legs. It was such a romp as
no one has ever had except in Narnia; and whether it was more like playing with a thunderstorm or
playing with a kitten Lucy could never make up her mind. And the funny thing was that when all
three finally lay together panting in the sun the girls no longer felt in the least tired or hungry or
thirsty.

"And now," said Aslan presently, "to business. I feel I am going to roar. You had better put your
fingers in your ears."

And they did. And Aslan stood up and when he opened his mouth to roar his face became so terrible
that they did not dare to look at it. And they saw all the trees in front of him bend before the blast of
his roaring as grass bends in a meadow before the wind. Then he said,

It was nearly midday when they found themselves looking down a steep hillside at a castle - a little
toy castle it looked from where they stood - which seemed to be all pointed towers. But the Lion was
rushing down at such a speed that it grew larger every moment and before they had time even to ask
themselves what it was they were already on a level with it. And now it no longer looked like a toy
castle but rose frowning in front of them. No face looked over the battlements and the gates were fast
shut. And Aslan, not at all slacking his pace, rushed straight as a bullet towards it.

"Hush," said Susan, "Aslan's doing something."

I expect you've seen someone put a lighted match to a bit of newspaper which is propped up in a
grate against an unlit fire. And for a second nothing seems to have happened; and then you notice a
tiny streak of flame creeping along the edge of the newspaper. It was like that now. For a second after
Aslan had breathed upon him the stone lion looked just the same. Then a tiny streak of gold began to
run along his white marble back then it spread - then the colour seemed to lick all over him as the
flame licks all over a bit of paper - then, while his hindquarters were still obviously stone, the lion
shook his mane and all the heavy, stone folds rippled into living hair. Then he opened a great red
mouth, warm and living, and gave a prodigious yawn. And now his hind legs had come to life. He
lifted one of them and scratched himself. Then, having caught sight of Aslan, he went bounding after
him and frisking round him whimpering with delight and jumping up to lick his face.

Of course the children's eyes turned to follow the lion; but the sight they saw was so wonderful that
they soon forgot about him. Everywhere the statues were coming to life. The courtyard looked no
longer like a museum; it looked more like a zoo. Creatures were running after Aslan and dancing
round him till he was almost hidden in the crowd. Instead of all that deadly white the courtyard was
now a blaze of colours; glossy chestnut sides of centaurs, indigo horns of unicorns, dazzling plumage
of birds, reddy-brown of foxes, dogs and satyrs, yellow stockings and crimson hoods of dwarfs; and
the birch-girls in silver, and the beech-girls in fresh, transparent green, and the larch-girls in green so
bright that it was almost yellow. And instead of the deadly silence the whole place rang with the
sound of happy roarings, brayings, yelpings, barkings, squealings, cooings, neighings, stampings,
shouts, hurrahs, songs and laughter.

Lucy looked and saw that Aslan had just breathed on the feet of the stone giant.

"It's all right!" shouted Aslan joyously. "Once the feet are put right, all the rest of him will follow."

"That wasn't exactly what I meant," whispered Susan to Lucy. But it was too late to do anything
about it now even if Aslan would have listened to her. The change was already creeping up the

"Bless me! I must have been asleep. Now! Where's that dratted little Witch that was running about
on the ground. Somewhere just by my feet it was." But when everyone had shouted up to him to
explain what had really happened, and when the Giant had put his hand to his ear and got them to
repeat it all again so that at last he understood, then he bowed down till his head was no further off
than the top of a haystack and touched his cap repeatedly to Aslan, beaming all over his honest ugly
face. (Giants of any sort are now so rare in England and so few giants are good-tempered that ten to
one you have never seen a giant when his face is beaming. It's a sight well worth looking at.)

"Now for the inside of this house!" said Aslan. "Look alive, everyone. Up stairs and down stairs and
in my lady's chamber! Leave no corner unsearched. You never know where some poor prisoner may
be concealed."

And into the interior they all rushed and for several minutes the whole of that dark, horrible, fusty
old castle echoed with the opening of windows and with everyone's voices crying out at once, "Don't
forget the dungeons - Give us a hand with this door! Here's another little winding stair - Oh! I say.
Here's a poor kangaroo. Call Aslan - Phew! How it smells in here - Look out for trap-doors - Up
here! There are a whole lot more on the landing!" But the best of all was when Lucy came rushing
upstairs shouting out,

"Aslan! Aslan! I've found Mr Tumnus. Oh, do come quick."

"But how are we going to get out?" for Aslan had got in by a jump and the gates were still locked.

"That'll be all right," said Aslan; and then, rising on his hind-legs, he bawled up at the Giant. "Hi!
You up there," he roared. "What's your name?"

"Well then, Giant Rumblebuffin," said Aslan, "just let us out of this, will you?"

At this point Aslan clapped his paws together and called for silence.

"Of course," said Aslan. "And now! Those who can't keep up - that is, children, dwarfs, and small
animals - must ride on the backs of those who can - that is, lions, centaurs, unicorns, horses, giants
and eagles. Those who are good with their noses must come in front with us lions to smell out where
the battle is. Look lively and sort yourselves."

And with a great deal of bustle and cheering they did. The most pleased of the lot was the other lion
who kept running about everywhere pretending to be very busy but really in order to say to everyone
he met. "Did you hear what he said? Us Lions. That means him and me. Us Lions. That's what I like
about Aslan. No side, no stand-off-ishness. Us Lions. That meant him and me." At least he went on
saying this till Aslan had loaded him up with three dwarfs, one dryad, two rabbits, and a hedgehog.
That steadied him a bit.

When all were ready (it was a big sheep-dog who actually helped Aslan most in getting them sorted
into their proper order) they set out through the gap in the castle wall. At first the lions and dogs went
nosing about in all directions. But then suddenly one great hound picked up the scent and gave a bay.
There was no time lost after that. Soon all the dogs and lions and wolves and other hunting animals
were going at full speed with their noses to the ground, and all the others, streaked out for about half

a mile behind them, were following as fast as they could. The noise was like an English fox-hunt only
better because every now and then with the music of the hounds was mixed the roar of the other lion
and sometimes the far deeper and more awful roar of Aslan himself. Faster and faster they went as
the scent became easier and easier to follow. And then, just as they came to the last curve in a narrow,
winding valley, Lucy heard above all these noises another noise - a different one, which gave her a
queer feeling inside. It was a noise of shouts and shrieks and of the clashing of metal against metal.

Then they came out of the narrow valley and at once she saw the reason. There stood Peter and
Edmund and all the rest of Aslan's army fighting desperately against the crowd of horrible creatures
whom she had seen last night; only now, in the daylight, they looked even stranger and more evil and
more deformed. There also seemed to be far more of them. Peter's army - which had their backs to
her looked terribly few. And there werestatues dotted all over the battlefield, so apparently the Witch
had been using her wand. But she did not seem to be using it now. She was fighting with her stone
knife. It was Peter she was fightin - both of them going at it so hard that Lucy could hardly make out
what was happening; she only saw the stone knife and Peter's sword flashing so quickly that they
looked like three knives and three swords. That pair were in the centre. On each side the line
stretched out. Horrible things were happening wherever she looked.

"Off my back, children," shouted Aslan. And they both tumbled off. Then with a roar that shook all
Narnia from the western lamp-post to the shores of the eastern sea the great beast flung himself upon
the White Witch. Lucy saw her face lifted towards him for one second with an expression of terror
and amazement. Then Lion and Witch had rolled over together but with the Witch underneath; and at
the same moment all war-like creatures whom Aslan had led from the Witch's house rushed madly on
the enemy lines, dwarfs with their battleaxes, dogs with teeth, the Giant with his club (and his feet
also crushed dozens of the foe), unicorns with their horns, centaurs with swords and hoofs. And
Peter's tired army cheered, and the newcomers roared, and the enemy squealed and gibbered till the
wood re-echoed with the din of that onset.

THE battle was all over a few minutes after their arrival. Most of the enemy had been killed in the
first charge of Aslan and his -companions; and when those who were still living saw that the Witch
was dead they either gave themselves up or took to flight. The next thing that Lucy knew was that
Peter and Aslan were shaking hands. It was strange to her to see Peter looking as he looked now - his
face was so pale and stern and he seemed so much older.

"It was all Edmund's doing, Aslan," Peter was saying. "We'd have been beaten if it hadn't been for

"Quick, Lucy," said Aslan.

"There are other people wounded," said Aslan while she was still looking eagerly into Edmund's
pale face and wondering if the cordial would have any result.

"Daughter of Eve," said Aslan in a graver voice, "others also are at the point of death. Must more
people die for Edmund?"

"I'm sorry, Aslan," said Lucy, getting up and going with him. And for the next half-hour they were
busy - she attending to the wounded while he restored those who had been turned into stone. When at
last she was free to come back to Edmund she found him standing on his feet and not only healed of
his wounds but looking better than she had seen him look - oh, for ages; in fact ever since his first
term at that horrid school which was where he had begun to go wrong. He had become his real old
self again and could look you in the face. And there on the field of battle Aslan made him a knight.

"Does he know," whispered Lucy to Susan, "what Aslan did for him? Does he know what the
arrangement with the Witch really was?"

That night they slept where they were. How Aslan provided food for them all I don't know; but
somehow or other they found themselves all sitting down on the grass to a fine high tea at about eight
o'clock. Next day they began marching eastward down the side of the great river. And the next day
after that, at about teatime, they actually reached the mouth. The castle of Cair Paravel on its little hill
towered up above them; before them were the sands, with rocks and little pools of salt water, and
seaweed, and the smell of the sea and long miles of bluish-green waves breaking for ever and ever on
the beach. And oh, the cry of the sea-gulls! Have you heard it? Can you remember?

That evening after tea the four children all managed to get down to the beach again and get their
shoes and stockings off and feel the sand between their toes. But next day was more solemn. For
then, in the Great Hall of Cair Paravel - that wonderful hall with the ivory roof and the west wall
hung with peacock's feathers and the eastern door which looks towards the sea, in the presence of all
their friends and to the sound of trumpets, Aslan solemnly crowned them and led them to the four
thrones amid deafening shouts of, "Long Live King Peter! Long Live Queen Susan! Long Live King
Edmund! Long Live Queen Lucy!"

"Once a king or queen in Narnia, always a king or queen. Bear it well, Sons of Adam! Bear it well,
Daughters of Eve!" said Aslan.

But amidst all these rejoicings Aslan himself quietly slipped away. And when the Kings and Queens
noticed that he wasn't there they said nothing about it. For Mr Beaver had warned them, "He'll be
coming and going," he had said. "One day you'll see him and another you won't. He doesn't like being
tied down and of course he has other countries to attend to. It's quite all right. He'll often drop in.
Only you mustn't press him. He's wild," you know. Not like a tame lion."

"Then in the name of Aslan," said Queen Susan, "if ye will all have it so, let us go on and take the
adventure that shall fall to us."

