ONCE there were four children whose names were Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy. This story is
about something that happened to them when they were sent away from London during the war
because of the air-raids. They were sent to the house of an old Professor who lived in the heart of the
country, ten miles from the nearest railway station and two miles from the nearest post office. He had
no wife and he lived in a very large house with a housekeeper called Mrs Macready and three
servants. (Their names were Ivy, Margaret and Betty, but they do not come into the story much.) He
himself was a very old man with shaggy white hair which grew over most of his face as well as on his
head, and they liked him almost at once; but on the first evening when he came out to meet them at
the front door he was so odd-looking that Lucy (who was the youngest) was a little afraid of him, and
Edmund (who was the next youngest) wanted to laugh and had to keep on pretending he was blowing
his nose to hide it.

"Oh, come off it!" said Edmund, who was tired and pretending not to be tired, which always made
him bad-tempered. "Don't go on talking like that."

"Trying to talk like Mother," said Edmund. "And who are you to say when I'm to go to bed? Go to
bed yourself."

"It's only a bird, silly," said Edmund.

"Foxes!" said Edmund.

"Of course it would be raining!" said Edmund. They had just finished their breakfast with the
Professor and were upstairs in the room he had set apart for them - a long, low room with two
windows looking out in one direction and two in another.

"Batty!" said Edmund, tapping his head. "Quite batty."

For the next few days she was very miserable. She could have made it up with the others quite
easily at any moment if she could have brought herself to say that the whole thing was only a story
made up for fun. But Lucy was a very truthful girl and she knew that she was really in the right; and
she could not bring herself to say this. The others who thought she was telling a lie, and a silly lie too,
made her very unhappy. The two elder ones did this without meaning to do it, but Edmund could be
spiteful, and on this occasion he was spiteful. He sneered and jeered at Lucy and kept on asking her if
she'd found any other new countries in other cupboards all over the house. What made it worse was
that these days ought to have been delightful. The weather was fine and they were out of doors from
morning to night, bathing, fishing, climbing trees, and lying in the heather. But Lucy could not
properly enjoy any of it. And so things went on until the next wet day.

Now the steps she had heard were those of Edmund; and he came into the room just in time to see
Lucy vanishing into the wardrobe. He at once decided to get into it himself - not because he thought
it a particularly good place to hide but because he wanted to go on teasing her about her imaginary
country. He opened the door. There were the coats hanging up as usual, and a smell of mothballs, and
darkness and silence, and no sign of Lucy. "She thinks I'm Susan come to catch her," said Edmund to
himself, "and so she's keeping very quiet in at the back." He jumped in and shut the door, forgetting
what a very foolish thing this is to do. Then he began feeling about for Lucy in the dark. He had
expected to find her in a few seconds and was very surprised when he did not. He decided to open the
door again and let in some light. But he could not find the door either. He didn't like this at all and
began groping wildly in every direction; he even shouted out, "Lucy! Lu! Where are you? I know
you're here."

There was no answer and Edmund noticed that his own voice had a curious sound - not the sound
you expect in a cupboard, but a kind of open-air sound. He also noticed that he was unexpectedly
cold; and then he saw a light.

"Thank goodness," said Edmund, "the door must have swung open of its own accord." He forgot all
about Lucy and went towards the light, which he thought was the open door of the wardrobe. But
instead of finding himself stepping out into the spare room he found himself stepping out from the
shadow of some thick dark fir trees into an open place in the middle of a wood.

He now remembered that he had been looking for Lucy; and also how unpleasant he had been to her
about her "imaginary country" which now turned out not to have been imaginary at all. He thought
that she must be somewhere quite close and so he shouted, "Lucy! Lucy! I'm here too-Edmund."

"She's angry about all the things I've been saying lately," thought Edmund. And though he did not
like to admit that he had been wrong, he also did not much like being alone in this strange, cold, quiet
place; so he shouted again.

"Just like a girl," said Edmund to himself, "sulking somewhere, and won't accept an apology." He
looked round him again and decided he did not much like this place, and had almost made up his
mind to go home, when he heard, very far off in the wood, a sound of bells. He listened and the sound
came nearer and nearer and at last there swept into sight a sledge drawn by two reindeer.

The reindeer were about the size of Shetland ponies and their hair was so white that even the snow
hardly looked white compared with them; their branching horns were gilded and shone like
something on fire when the sunrise caught them. Their harness was of scarlet leather and covered
with bells. On the sledge, driving the reindeer, sat a fat dwarf who would have been about three feet
high if he had been standing. He was dressed in polar bear's fur and on his head he wore a red hood
with a long gold tassel hanging down from its point; his huge beard covered his knees and served him
instead of a rug. But behind him, on a much higher seat in the middle of the sledge sat a very
different person - a great lady, taller than any woman that Edmund had ever seen. She also was
covered in white fur up to her throat and held a long straight golden wand in her right hand and wore
a golden crown on her head. Her face was white - not merely pale, but white like snow or paper or
icing-sugar, except for her very red mouth. It was a beautiful face in other respects, but proud and
cold and stern.

The sledge was a fine sight as it came sweeping towards Edmund with the bells jingling and the
dwarf cracking his whip and the snow flying up on each side of it.

"And what, pray, are you?" said the Lady, looking hard at Edmund.

"I'm-I'm-my name's Edmund," said Edmund rather awkwardly. He did not like the way she looked

"I beg your pardon, your Majesty, I didn't know," said Edmund:

"Please, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I don't know what you mean. I'm at school - at least I was it's
the holidays now."

"No, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I never had a beard, I'm a boy."

Edmund stood still, saying nothing. He was too confused by this time to understand what the
question meant.

"Yes, your Majesty," said Edmund.

"I - I opened a door and just found myself here, your Majesty," said Edmund.

"Ha!" said the Queen, speaking more to herself than to him. "A door. A door from the world of
men! I have heard of such things. This may wreck all. But he is only one, and he is easily dealt with."
As she spoke these words she rose from her seat and looked Edmund full in the face, her eyes
flaming; at the same moment she raised her wand. Edmund felt sure that she was going to do
something dreadful but he seemed unable to move. Then, just as he gave himself up for lost, she
appeared to change her mind.

Edmund did not like this arrangement at all but he dared not disobey; he stepped on to the sledge and
sat at her feet, and she put a fold of her fur mantle round him and tucked it well in.

"Yes please, your Majesty," said Edmund, whose teeth were chattering.

The Queen took from somewhere among her wrappings a very small bottle which looked as if it
were made of copper. Then, holding out her arm, she let one drop fall from it on the snow beside the
sledge. Edmund saw the drop for a second in mid-air, shining like a diamond. But the moment it
touched the snow there was a hissing sound and there stood a jewelled cup full of something that
steamed. The dwarf immediately took this and handed it to Edmund with a bow and a smile; not a
very nice smile. Edmund felt much better as he began to sip the hot drink. It was something he had
never tasted before, very sweet and foamy and creamy, and it warmed him right down to his toes.

"Turkish Delight, please, your Majesty," said Edmund.

The Queen let another drop fall from her bottle on to the snow, and instantly there appeared a round
box, tied with green silk ribbon, which, when opened, turned out to contain several pounds of the best
Turkish Delight. Each piece was sweet and light to the very centre and Edmund had never tasted
anything more delicious. He was quite warm now, and very comfortable.

While he was eating the Queen kept asking him questions. At first Edmund tried to remember that it
is rude to speak with one's mouth full, but soon he forgot about this and thought only of trying to
shovel down as much Turkish Delight as he could, and the more he ate the more he wanted to eat,
and he never asked himself why the Queen should be so inquisitive. She got him to tell her that he
had one brother and two sisters, and that one of his sisters had already been in Narnia and had met a
Faun there, and that no one except himself and his brother and his sisters knew anything about
Narnia. She seemed especially interested in the fact that there were four of them, and kept on coming
back to it. "You are sure there are just four of you?" she asked. "Two Sons of Adam and two
Daughters of Eve, neither more nor less?" and Edmund, with his mouth full of Turkish Delight, kept
on saying, "Yes, I told you that before," and forgetting to call her "Your Majesty", but she didn't
seem to mind now.

At last the Turkish Delight was all finished and Edmund was looking very hard at the empty box
and wishing that she would ask him whether he would like some more. Probably the Queen knew
quite well what he was thinking; for she knew, though Edmund did not, that this was enchanted
Turkish Delight and that anyone who had once tasted it would want more and more of it, and would
even, if they were allowed, go on eating it till they killed themselves. But she did not offer him any
more. Instead, she said to him,

"I'll try," said Edmund, still looking at the empty box.

"Why can't we go to your house now?" said Edmund. When he had first got on to the sledge he had
been afraid that she might drive away with him to some unknown place from which he would not be
able to get back; but he had forgotten about that fear now.

"Why not now?" said Edmund. His face had become very red and his mouth and fingers were sticky.
He did not look either clever or handsome, whatever the Queen might say.

"There's nothing special about them," said Edmund, "and, anyway, I could always bring them some
other time."

"But I don't even know the way back to my own country," pleaded Edmund. "That's easy," answered
the Queen. "Do you see that lamp?" She pointed with her wand and Edmund turned and saw the same
lamp-post under which Lucy had met the Faun. "Straight on, beyond that, is the way to the World of
Men. And now look the other way'- here she pointed in the opposite direction - "and tell me if you
can see two little hills rising above the trees."

"I think I can," said Edmund.

"I'll do my best," said Edmund.

"Please, please," said Edmund suddenly, "please couldn't I have just one piece of Turkish Delight to
eat on the way home?"

"No, no," said the Queen with a laugh, "you must wait till next time." While she spoke, she signalled
to the dwarf to drive on, but as the sledge swept away out of sight, the Queen waved to Edmund,
calling out, "Next time! Next time! Don't forget. Come soon."

Edmund was still staring after the sledge when he heard someone calling his own name, and looking
round he saw Lucy coming towards him from another part of the wood.

"Oh, Edmund!" she cried. "So you've got in too! Isn't it wonderful, and now-"

"All right," said Edmund, "I see you were right and it is a magic wardrobe after all. I'll say I'm sorry
if you like. But where on earth have you been all this time? I've been looking for you everywhere."

"If I'd known you had got in I'd have waited for you," said Lucy, who was too happy and excited to
notice how snappishly Edmund spoke or how flushed and strange his face was. "I've been having
lunch with dear Mr Tumnus, the Faun, and he's very well and the White Witch has done nothing to
him for letting me go, so he thinks she can't have found out and perhaps everything is going to be all
right after all."

"The White Witch?" said Edmund; "who's she?"

Edmund was already feeling uncomfortable from having eaten too many sweets, and when he heard
that the Lady he had made friends with was a dangerous witch he felt even more uncomfortable. But
he still wanted to taste that Turkish Delight again more than he wanted anything else.

"You can't always believe what Fauns say," said Edmund, trying to sound as if he knew far more
about them than Lucy.

"Everyone knows it," said Edmund; "ask anybody you like. But it's pretty poor sport standing here
in the snow. Let's go home."

"Yes, let's," said Lucy. "Oh, Edmund, I am glad you've got in too. The others will have to believe in
Narnia now that both of us have been there. What fun it will be!"

But Edmund secretly thought that it would not be as good fun for him as for her. He would have to
admit that Lucy had been right, before all the others, and he felt sure the others would all be on the
side of the Fauns and the animals; but he was already more than half on the side of the Witch. He did
not know what he would say, or how he would keep his secret once they were all talking about
Narnia.

"I say," said Lucy, "you do look awful, Edmund. Don't you feel well?"

"I'm all right," said Edmund, but this was not true. He was feeling very sick.

BECAUSE the game of hide-and-seek was still going on, it took Edmund and Lucy some time to

"Peter! Susan! It's all true. Edmund has seen it too. There is a country you can get to through the
wardrobe. Edmund and I both got in. We met one another in there, in the wood. Go on, Edmund; tell
them all about it."

And now we come to one of the nastiest things in this story. Up to that moment Edmund had been
feeling sick, and sulky, and annoyed with Lucy for being right, but he hadn't made up his mind what
to do. When Peter suddenly asked him the question he decided all at once to do the meanest and most
spiteful thing he could think of. He decided to let Lucy down.

And Edmund gave a very superior look as if he were far older than Lucy (there was really only a
year's difference) and then a little snigger and said, "Oh, yes, Lucy and I have been playing pretending that all her story about a country in the wardrobe is true. just for fun, of course. There's
nothing there really."

Poor Lucy gave Edmund one look and rushed out of the room.

Edmund, who was becoming a nastier person every minute, thought that he had scored a great
success, and went on at once to say, "There she goes again. What's the matter with her? That's the
worst of young kids, they always -"

"But it's all nonsense," said Edmund, very taken aback.

"I thought - I thought," said Edmund; but he couldn't think of anything to say.

It was an unpleasant evening. Lucy was miserable and Edmund was beginning to feel that his plan
wasn't working as well as he had expected. The two older ones were really beginning to think that
Lucy was out of her mind. They stood in the passage talking about it in whispers long after she had
gone to bed.

"Oh, but -" began Susan, and then stopped. Anyone could see from the old man's face that he was
perfectly serious. Then Susan pulled herself together and said, "But Edmund said they had only been
pretending."

After this things were a good deal better for Lucy. Peter saw to it that Edmund stopped jeering at
her, and neither she nor anyone else felt inclined to talk about the wardrobe at all. It had become a
rather alarming subject. And so for a time it looked as if all the adventures were coming to an end;
but that was not to be.

"Just as if any of us would want to waste half the morning trailing round with a crowd of strange
grown-ups!" said Edmund, and the other three thought the same. That was how the adventures began
for the second time.

A few mornings later Peter and Edmund were looking at the suit of armour and wondering if they
could take it to bits when the two girls rushed into the room and said, "Look out! Here comes the
Macready and a whole gang with her."

"And what a filthy smell of camphor!" said Edmund.

"Let's get out," said Edmund, "they've gone."

"I say," began Edmund presently, "oughtn't we to be bearing a bit more to the left, that is, if we are

There was a dead silence. "Well, of all the poisonous little beasts -" said Peter, and shrugged his
shoulders and said no more. There seemed, indeed, no more to say, and presently the four resumed
their journey; but Edmund was saying to himself, "I'll pay you all out for this, you pack of stuck-up,
selfsatisfied prigs."

"This is a pretty good wash-out," said Edmund; "not much good coming here."

"A lot we could do! said Edmund, "when we haven't even got anything to eat!"

"Shut up - you!" said Peter, who was still very angry with Edmund. "What do you think, Susan?"

The Robin appeared to understand the matter thoroughly. It kept going from tree to tree, always a
few yards ahead of them, but always so near that they could easily follow it. In this way it led them
on, slightly downhill. Wherever the Robin alighted a little shower of snow would fall off the branch.
Presently the clouds parted overhead and the winter sun came out and the snow all around them grew
dazzlingly bright. They had been travelling in this way for about half an hour, with the two girls in
front, when Edmund said to Peter, "if you're not still too high and mighty to talk to me, I've
something to say which you'd better listen to."

"Hush! Not so loud," said Edmund; "there's no good frightening the girls. But have you realised
what we're doing?"

"And no chance of dinner either," said Edmund.

"And now what are we to do?" said Edmund, giving Peter a look which was as much as to say
"What did I tell you?"

"Let's go home," said Susan. And then, though nobody said it out loud, everyone suddenly realised
the same fact that Edmund had whispered to Peter at the end of the last chapter. They were lost.

"Yes, but how do we know?" said Edmund.

"If it comes to talking about sides," said Edmund, "how do we know you're a friend?"

in its inside. Edmund felt a sensation of mysterious horror. Peter felt suddenly brave and adventurous.
Susan felt as if some delicious smell or some delightful strain of music had just floated by her. And
Lucy got the feeling you have when you wake up in the morning and realize that it is the beginning of
the holidays or the beginning of summer.

No one except Edmund felt any difficulty about trusting the beaver now, and everyone, including
Edmund, was very glad to hear the word "dinner".

That was what the others chiefly noticed, but Edmund noticed something else. A little lower down
the river there was another small river which came down another small valley to join it. And looking
up that valley, Edmund could see two small hills, and he was almost sure they were the two hills
which the White Witch had pointed out to him when he parted from her at the lamp-post that other
day. And then between them, he thought, must be her palace, only a mile off or less. And he thought
about Turkish Delight and about being a King ("And I wonder how Peter will like that?" he asked
himself) and horrible ideas came into his head.

"She won't turn him into stone too?" said Edmund.

"I say-where's Edmund?"

thickly and steadily, the green ice of the pool had vanished under a thick white blanket, and from
where the little house stood in the centre of the dam you could hardly see either bank. Out they went,
plunging well over their ankles into the soft new snow, and went round the house in every direction.
"Edmund! Edmund!" they called till they were hoarse. But the silently falling snow seemed to muffle
their voices and there was not even an echo in answer.

"Why, to look for Edmund, of course!"

"Can't he?" said Mr Beaver, looking very hard at the three children, and everything they wanted to
say died on their lips, for each felt suddenly quite certain inside that this was exactly what Edmund
had done.

"But that isn't what she'll do first," said Mrs Beaver, "not if I know her. The moment that Edmund
tells her that we're all here she'll set out to catch us this very night, and if he's been gone about half an
hour, she'll be here in about another twenty minutes."

AND now of course you want to know what had happened to Edmund. He had eaten his share of the
dinner, but he hadn't really enjoyed it because he was thinking all the time about Turkish Delight and there's nothing that spoils the taste of good ordinary food half so much as the memory of bad
magic food. And he had heard the conversation, and hadn't enjoyed it much either, because he kept
on thinking that the others were taking no notice of him and trying to give him the cold shoulder.
They weren't, but he imagined it. And then he had listened until Mr Beaver told them about Aslan
and until he had heard the whole arrangement for meeting Aslan at the Stone Table. It was then that
he began very quietly to edge himself under the curtain which hung over the door. For the mention of
Aslan gave him a mysterious and horrible feeling just as it gave the others a mysterious and lovely
feeling.

Just as Mr Beaver had been repeating the rhyme about Adam's flesh and Adam's bone Edmund had
been very quietly turning the doorhandle; and just before Mr Beaver had begun telling them that the
White Witch wasn't really human at all but half a Jinn and half a giantess, Edmund had got outside
into the snow and cautiously closed the door behind him.

You mustn't think that even now Edmund was quite so bad that he actually wanted his brother and
sisters to be turned into stone. He did want Turkish Delight and to be a Prince (and later a King) and
to pay Peter out for calling him a beast. As for what the Witch would do with the others, he didn't
want her to be particularly nice to them - certainly not to put them on the same level as himself; but
he managed to believe, or to pretend he believed, that she wouldn't do anything very bad to them,
"Because," he said to himself, "all these people who say nasty things about her are her enemies and
probably half of it isn't true. She was jolly nice to me, anyway, much nicer than they are. I expect she

But at last he came to a part where it was more level and the valley opened out. And there, on the
other side of the river, quite close to him, in the middle of a little plain between two hills, he saw
what must be the White Witch's House. And the moon was shining brighter than ever. The House
was really a small castle. It seemed to be all towers; little towers with long pointed spires on them,
sharp as needles. They looked like huge dunce's caps or sorcerer's caps. And they shone in the
moonlight and their long shadows looked strange on the snow. Edmund began to be afraid of the

Edmund crept up to the arch and looked inside into the courtyard, and there he saw a sight that
nearly made his heart stop beating. Just inside the gate, with the moonlight shining on it, stood an
enormous lion crouched as if it was ready to spring. And Edmund stood in the shadow of the arch,
afraid to go on and afraid to go back, with his knees knocking together. He stood there so long that
his teeth would have been chattering with cold even if they had not been chattering with fear. How
long this really lasted I don't know, but it seemed to Edmund to last for hours.

Then at last he began to wonder why the lion was standing so still - for it hadn't moved one inch
since he first set eyes on it. Edmund now ventured a little nearer, still keeping in the shadow of the
arch as much as he could. He now saw from the way the lion was standing that it couldn't have been
looking at him at all. ("But supposing it turns its head?" thought Edmund.) In fact it was staring at
something else namely a little: dwarf who stood with his back to it about four feet away. "Aha!"
thought Edmund. "When it springs at the dwarf then will be my chance to escape." But still the lion
never moved, nor did the dwarf. And now at last Edmund remembered what the others had said about
the White Witch turning people into stone. Perhaps this was only a stone lion. And as soon as he had
thought of that he noticed that the lion's back and the top of its head were covered with snow. Of
course it must be only a statue! No living animal would have let itself get covered with snow. Then
very slowly and with his heart beating as if it would burst, Edmund ventured to go up to the lion.
Even now he hardly dared to touch it, but at last he put out his hand, very quickly, and did. It was
cold stone. He had been frightened of a mere statue!

The relief which Edmund felt was so great that in spite of the cold he suddenly got warm all over
right down to his toes, and at the same time there came into his head what seemed a perfectly lovely
idea. "Probably," he thought, "this is the great Lion Aslan that they were all talking about. She's
caught him already and turned him into stone. So that's the end of all their fine ideas about him!
Pooh! Who's afraid of Aslan?"

childish. He took a stump of lead pencil out of his pocket and scribbled a moustache on the lion's
upper lip and then a pair of spectacles on its eyes. Then he said, "Yah! Silly old Aslan! How do you
like being a stone? You thought yourself mighty fine, didn't you?" But in spite of the scribbles on it
the face of the great stone beast still looked so terrible, and sad, and noble, staring up in the
moonlight, that Edmund didn't really get any fun out of jeering at it. He turned away and began to
cross the courtyard.

As he got into the middle of it he saw that there were dozens of statues all about - standing here and
there rather as the pieces stand on a chess-board when it is half-way through the game. There were
stone satyrs, and stone wolves, and bears and foxes and cat-amountains of stone. There were lovely
stone shapes that looked like women but who were really the spirits of trees. There was the great
shape of a centaur and a winged horse and a long lithe creature that Edmund took to be a dragon.
They all looked so strange standing there perfectly life-like and also perfectly still, in the bright cold
moonlight, that it was eerie work crossing the courtyard. Right in the very middle stood a huge shape
like a man, but as tall as a tree, with a fierce face and a shaggy beard and a great club in its right
hand. Even though he knew that it was only a stone giant and not a live one, Edmund did not like
going past it.

He now saw that there was a dim light showing from a doorway on the far side of the courtyard. He
went to it; there was a flight of stone steps going up to an open door. Edmund went up them. Across
the threshold lay a great wolf.

"If you please, sir," said Edmund, trembling so that he could hardly speak, "my name is Edmund,
and I'm the Son of Adam that Her Majesty met in the wood the other day and I've come to bring her
the news that my brother and sisters are now in Narnia - quite close, in the Beavers' house. She - she
wanted to see them."

Edmund stood and waited, his fingers aching with cold and his heart pounding in his chest, and
presently the grey wolf, Maugrim, the Chief of the Witch's Secret Police, came bounding back and
said, "Come in! Come in! Fortunate favourite of the Queen - or else not so fortunate."

And Edmund went in, taking great care not to tread on the Wolf's paws.

He found himself in a long gloomy hall with many pillars, full, as the courtyard had been, of statues.
The one nearest the door was a little faun with a very sad expression on its face, and Edmund couldn't
help wondering if this might be Lucy's friend. The only light came from a single lamp and close
beside this sat the White Witch.

"I'm come, your Majesty," said Edmund, rushing eagerly forward.

"Please, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I've done the best I can. I've brought them quite close.
They're in the little house on top of the dam just up the riverwith Mr and Mrs Beaver."

"No, your Majesty," said Edmund, and proceeded to tell her all he had heard before leaving the
Beavers' house.

"Please, I'm only repeating what they said," stammered Edmund.

But the Queen, who was no longer attending to him, clapped her hands. Instantly the same dwarf
whom Edmund had seen with her before appeared.

EDMUND meanwhile had been having a most disappointing time. When the dwarf had gone to get
the sledge ready he expected that the Witch would start being nice to him, as she had been at their last
meeting. But she said nothing at all. And when at last Edmund plucked up his courage to say,
"Please, your Majesty, could I have some Turkish Delight? You - you - said -" she answered,
"Silence, fool!" Then she appeared to change her mind and said, as if to herself, a "And yet it will not
do to have the brat fainting on the way," and once more clapped her hands. Another, dwarf appeared.

plate with a hunk of dry bread on it. He grinned in a repulsive manner as he set them down on the
floor beside Edmund and said:

"Take it away," said Edmund sulkily. "I don't want dry bread." But the Witch suddenly turned on
him with such a terrible expression on her face that he, apologised and began to nibble at the bread,
though, it was so stale he could hardly get it down.

While he was still chewing away the first dwarf came back and announced that the sledge was
ready. The White Witch rose and went out, ordering Edmund to go with her. The snow was again
falling as they came into the courtyard, but she took no notice of that and made Edmund sit beside
her on the sledge. But before they drove off she called Maugrim and he came bounding like an
enormous dog to the side of the sledge.

Meanwhile the dwarf whipped up the reindeer, and the Witch and Edmund drove out under the
archway and on and away into the darkness and the cold. This was a terrible journey for Edmund,
who had no coat. Before they had been going quarter of an hour all the front of him was covered with
snow - he soon stopped trying to shake it off because, as quickly as he did that, a new lot gathered,
and he was so tired. Soon he was wet to the skin. And oh, how miserable he was! It didn't look now

How Edmund hoped she was going to say something about breakfast! But she had stopped for quite
a different reason. A little way off at the foot of a tree sat a merry party, a squirrel and his wife with
their children and two satyrs and a dwarf and an old dogfox, all on stools round a table. Edmund
couldn't quite see what they were eating, but it smelled lovely and there seemed to be decorations of
holly and he wasn't at all sure that he didn't see something like a plum pudding. At the moment when
the sledge stopped, the Fox, who was obviously the oldest person present, had just risen to its feet,
holding a glass in its right paw as if it was going to say something. But when the whole party saw the
sledge stopping and who was in it, all the gaiety went out of their faces. The father squirrel stopped
eating with his fork half-way to his mouth and one of the satyrs stopped with its fork actually in its
mouth, and the baby squirrels squeaked with terror.

"He has - he has - he has!" it squeaked, beating its little spoon on the table. Edmund saw the Witch
bite her lips so that a drop of blood appeared on her white cheek. Then she raised her wand. "Oh,
don't, don't, please don't," shouted Edmund, but even while he was shouting she had waved her wand
and instantly where the merry party had been there were only statues of creatures (one with its stone
fork fixed forever half-way to its stone mouth) seated round a stone table on which there were stone
plates and a stone plum pudding.

"As for you," said the Witch, giving Edmund a stunning blow on the face as she re-mounted the
sledge, "let that teach you to ask favour for spies and traitors. Drive on!" And Edmund for the first
time in this story felt sorry for someone besides himself. It seemed so pitiful to think of those little
stone figures sitting there all the silent days and all the dark nights, year after year, till the moss grew
on them and at last even their faces crumbled away.

Now they were steadily racing on again. And soon Edmund noticed that the snow which splashed
against them as they rushed through it was much wetter than it had been all last night. At the same
time he noticed that he was feeling much less cold. It was also becoming foggy. In fact every minute
it grew foggier and warmer. And the sledge was not running nearly as well as it had been running up
till now. At first he thought this was because the reindeer were tired, but soon he saw that that
couldn't be the real reason. The sledge jerked, and skidded and kept on jolting as if it had struck
against stones. And however the dwarf whipped the poor reindeer the sledge went slower and slower.
There also seemed to be a curious noise all round them, but the noise of their driving and jolting and
the dwarf's shouting at the reindeer prevented Edmund from hearing what it was, until suddenly the
sledge stuck so fast that it wouldn't go on at all. When that happened there was a moment's silence.
And in that silence Edmund could at last listen to the other noise properly. A strange, sweet, rustling,
chattering noise - and yet not so strange, for he'd heard it before - if only he could remember where!
Then all at once he did remember. It was the noise of running water. All round them though out of
sight, there were streams, chattering, murmuring, bubbling, splashing and even (in the distance)
roaring. And his heart gave a great leap (though he hardly knew why) when he realised that the frost
was over. And much nearer there was a drip-drip-drip from the branches of all the trees. And then, as
he looked at one tree he saw a great load of snow slide off it and for the first time since he had
entered Narnia he saw the dark green of a fir tree. But he hadn't time to listen or watch any longer, for
the Witch said:

And of course Edmund had to obey. He stepped out into the snow - but it was really only slush by
now - and began helping the dwarf to get the sledge out of the muddy hole it had got into. They got it
out in the end, and by being very cruel to the reindeer the dwarf managed to get it on the move again,
and they drove a little further. And now the snow was really melting in earnest and patches of green
grass were beginning to appear in every direction. Unless you have looked at a world of snow as long
as Edmund had been looking at it, you will hardly be able to imagine what a relief those green
patches were after the endless white. Then the sledge stopped again.

The dwarf obeyed, and in a few minutes Edmund found himself being forced to walk as fast as he
could with his hands tied behind him. He kept on slipping in the slush and mud and wet grass, and
every time he slipped the dwarf gave him a curse and sometimes a flick with the whip. The Witch
walked behind the dwarf and kept on saying, "Faster! Faster!"

silver birch trees Edmund saw the ground covered in all directions with little yellow flowers celandines. The noise of water grew louder. Presently they actually crossed a stream. Beyond it they
found snowdrops growing.

"Mind your own business!" said the dwarf when he saw that Edmund had turned his head to look at
them; and he gave the rope a vicious jerk.

But of course this didn't prevent Edmund from seeing. Only five minutes later he noticed a dozen
crocuses growing round the foot of an old tree - gold and purple and white. Then came a sound even
more delicious than the sound of the water. Close beside the path they were following a bird suddenly
chirped from the branch of a tree. It was answered by the chuckle of another bird a little further off.
And then, as if that had been a signal, there was chattering and chirruping in every direction, and then
a moment of full song, and within five minutes the whole wood was ringing with birds' music, and
wherever Edmund's eyes turned he saw birds alighting on branches, or sailing overhead or chasing
one another or having their little quarrels or tidying up their feathers with their beaks.

They had been just as surprised as Edmund when they saw the winter vanishing and the whole wood
passing in a few hours or so from January to May. They hadn't even known for certain (as the Witch
did) that this was what would happen when Aslan came to Narnia. But they all knew that it was her
spells which had produced the endless winter; and therefore they all knew when this magic spring
began that something had gone wrong, and badly wrong, with the Witch's schemes. And after the
thaw had been going on for some time they all realised that the Witch would no longer be able to use
her sledge. After that they didn't hurry so much and they allowed themselves more rests and longer
ones. They were pretty tired by now of course; but not what I'd call bitterly tired - only slow and
feeling very dreamy and quiet inside as one does when one is coming to the end of a long day in the
open. Susan had a slight blister on one heel.

"Please - Aslan," said Lucy, "can anything be done to save Edmund?"

Now we must get back to Edmund. When he had been made to walk far further than he had ever
known that anybody could walk, the Witch at last halted in a dark valley all overshadowed with fir
trees and yew trees. Edmund simply sank down and lay on his face doing nothing at all and not even
caring what was going to happen next provided they would let him lie still. He was too tired even to
notice how hungry and thirsty he was. The Witch and the dwarf were talking close beside him in low
tones.

"Yet it might be better," said the dwarf, "to keep this one" (here he kicked Edmund) "for bargaining
with."

Edmund found himself being roughly forced to his feet. Then the dwarf set him with his back against

"Prepare the victim,", said the Witch. And the dwarf undid Edmund's collar and folded back his shirt
at the neck. Then he took Edmund's hair and pulled his head back so that he had to raise his chin.
After that Edmund heard a strange noise - whizz whizz - whizz. For a moment he couldn't think what
it was. Then he realised. It was the sound of a knife being sharpened.

Then he heard the voices of people who were not talking to him but to one another. And they were
saying things like "Who's got the Witch?" "I thought you had her." "I didn't see her after I knocked
the knife out of her hand - I was after the dwarf - do you mean to say she's escaped?" "- A chap can't
mind everything at once - what's that? Oh, sorry, it's only an old stump!" But just at this point
Edmund went off in a dead faint.

Presently the centaurs and unicorns and deer and birds (they were of course the rescue party which
Aslan had sent in the last chapter) all set off to go back to the Stone Table, carrying Edmund with
them. But if they could have seen what happened in that valley after they had gone, I think they might
have been surprised.

When the other children woke up next morning (they had been sleeping on piles of cushions in the
pavilion) the first thing they heard -from Mrs Beaver - was that their brother had been rescued and
brought into camp late last night; and was at that moment with Aslan. As soon as they had
breakfasted4 they all went out, and there they saw Aslan and Edmund walking together in the dewy
grass, apart from the rest of the court. There is no need to tell you (and no one ever heard) what Aslan
was saying, but it was a conversation which Edmund never forgot. As the others drew nearer Aslan
turned to meet them, bringing Edmund with him.

Edmund shook hands with each of the others and said to each of them in turn, "I'm sorry," and
everyone said, "That's all right." And then everyone wanted very hard to say something which would
make it quite clear that they were all friends with him again -something ordinary and natural -and of
course no one could think of anything in the world to say. But before they had time to feel really
awkward one of the leopards approached Aslan and said,

"You have a traitor there, Aslan," said the Witch. Of course everyone present knew that she meant
Edmund. But Edmund had got past thinking about himself after all he'd been through and after the
talk he'd had that morning. He just went on looking at Aslan. It didn't seem to matter what the Witch
said.

Edmund was on the other side of Aslan, looking all the time at Aslan's face. He felt a choking
feeling and wondered if he ought to say something; but a moment later he felt that he was not
expected to do anything except to wait, and do what he was told.

They all obeyed. It was a terrible time this - waiting and wondering while the Lion and the Witch
talked earnestly together in low voices. Lucy said, "Oh, Edmund!" and began to cry. Peter stood with

When once Aslan had been tied (and tied so that he was really a mass of cords) on the flat stone, a
hush fell on the crowd. Four Hags, holding four torches, stood at the corners of the Table. The Witch
bared her arms as she had bared them the previous night when it had been Edmund instead of Aslan.
Then she began to whet her knife. It looked to the children, when the gleam of the torchlight fell on
it, as if the knife were made of stone, not of steel, and it was of a strange and evil shape.

Then they came out of the narrow valley and at once she saw the reason. There stood Peter and
Edmund and all the rest of Aslan's army fighting desperately against the crowd of horrible creatures
whom she had seen last night; only now, in the daylight, they looked even stranger and more evil and
more deformed. There also seemed to be far more of them. Peter's army - which had their backs to
her looked terribly few. And there werestatues dotted all over the battlefield, so apparently the Witch
had been using her wand. But she did not seem to be using it now. She was fighting with her stone
knife. It was Peter she was fightin - both of them going at it so hard that Lucy could hardly make out
what was happening; she only saw the stone knife and Peter's sword flashing so quickly that they
looked like three knives and three swords. That pair were in the centre. On each side the line
stretched out. Horrible things were happening wherever she looked.

"It was all Edmund's doing, Aslan," Peter was saying. "We'd have been beaten if it hadn't been for

They found Edmund in charge of Mrs Beaver a little way back from the fighting line. He was
covered with blood, his mouth was open, and his face a nasty green colour.

"There are other people wounded," said Aslan while she was still looking eagerly into Edmund's
pale face and wondering if the cordial would have any result.

"Daughter of Eve," said Aslan in a graver voice, "others also are at the point of death. Must more
people die for Edmund?"

"I'm sorry, Aslan," said Lucy, getting up and going with him. And for the next half-hour they were
busy - she attending to the wounded while he restored those who had been turned into stone. When at
last she was free to come back to Edmund she found him standing on his feet and not only healed of
his wounds but looking better than she had seen him look - oh, for ages; in fact ever since his first
term at that horrid school which was where he had begun to go wrong. He had become his real old
self again and could look you in the face. And there on the field of battle Aslan made him a knight.

That evening after tea the four children all managed to get down to the beach again and get their
shoes and stockings off and feel the sand between their toes. But next day was more solemn. For
then, in the Great Hall of Cair Paravel - that wonderful hall with the ivory roof and the west wall
hung with peacock's feathers and the eastern door which looks towards the sea, in the presence of all
their friends and to the sound of trumpets, Aslan solemnly crowned them and led them to the four
thrones amid deafening shouts of, "Long Live King Peter! Long Live Queen Susan! Long Live King
Edmund! Long Live Queen Lucy!"

And now, as you see, this story is nearly (but not quite) at an end. These two Kings and two Queens
governed Narnia well, and long and happy was their reign. At first much of their time was spent in
seeking out the remnants of the White Witch's army and destroying them, and indeed for a long time
there would be news of evil things lurking in the wilder parts of the forest - a haunting here and a
killing there, a glimpse of a werewolf one month and a rumour of a hag the next. But in the end all
that foul brood was stamped out. And they made good laws and kept the peace and saved good trees
from being unnecessarily cut down, and liberated young dwarfs and young satyrs from being sent to
school, and generally stopped busybodies and interferers and encouraged ordinary people who
wanted to live and let live. And they drove back the fierce giants (quite a different sort from Giant
Rumblebuffin) on the north of Narnia when these ventured across the frontier. And they entered into
friendship and alliance with countries beyond the sea and paid them visits of state and received visits
of state from them. And they themselves grew and changed as the years passed over them. And Peter
became a tall and deep-chested man and a great warrior, and he was called King Peter the
Magnificent. And Susan grew into a tall and gracious woman with black hair that fell almost to her
feet and the kings of the countries beyond the sea began to send ambassadors asking for her hand in
marriage. And she was called Susan the Gentle. Edmund was a graver and quieter man than Peter,
and great in council and judgement. He was called King Edmund the Just. But as for Lucy, she was
always gay and golden-haired, and all princes in those parts desired her to be their Queen, and her
own people called her Queen Lucy the Valiant.

"Madam," said,King Edmund, "if you look well upon it you shall see it is a pillar of iron with a
lantern set on the top thereof."

"Sir," said Queen Lucy. "By likelihood when this post and this lamp were set here there were smaller
trees in the place, or fewer, or none. For this is a young wood and the iron post is old." And they
stood looking upon it. Then said King Edmund,

"Madam," said King Edmund, "the like foreboding stirreth in my heart also."

"And so say I," said King Edmund. "And I have such desire to find the signification of this thing that
I would not by my good will turn back for the richest jewel in all Narnia and all the islands."

So these Kings and Queens entered the thicket, and before they had gone a score of paces they all
remembered that the thing they had seen was called a lamppost, and before they had gone twenty
more they noticed that they were. making their way not through branches but through coats. And next
moment they all came tumbling out of a wardrobe door into the empty room, and They were no
longer Kings and Queens in their hunting array but just Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy in their old
clothes. It was the same day and the same hour of the day on which they had all gone into the
wardrobe to hide. Mrs Macready and the visitors were still talking in the passage; but luckily they
never came into the empty room and so the children weren't caught.

