ONCE there were four children whose names were Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy. This story is
about something that happened to them when they were sent away from London during the war
because of the air-raids. They were sent to the house of an old Professor who lived in the heart of the
country, ten miles from the nearest railway station and two miles from the nearest post office. He had
no wife and he lived in a very large house with a housekeeper called Mrs Macready and three
servants. (Their names were Ivy, Margaret and Betty, but they do not come into the story much.) He
himself was a very old man with shaggy white hair which grew over most of his face as well as on his
head, and they liked him almost at once; but on the first evening when he came out to meet them at
the front door he was so odd-looking that Lucy (who was the youngest) was a little afraid of him, and
Edmund (who was the next youngest) wanted to laugh and had to keep on pretending he was blowing
his nose to hide it.

"Hadn't we all better go to bed?" said Lucy. "There's sure to be a row if we're heard talking here."

"What's that noise?" said Lucy suddenly. It was a far larger house than she had ever been in before
and the thought of all those long passages and rows of doors leading into empty rooms was beginning
to make her feel a little creepy.

"Badgers!" said Lucy.

"Nothing there!" said Peter, and they all trooped out again - all except Lucy. She stayed behind
because she thought it would be worth while trying the door of the wardrobe, even though she felt
almost sure that it would be locked. To her surprise it opened quite easily, and two moth-balls
dropped out.

Looking into the inside, she saw several coats hanging up - mostly long fur coats. There was nothing
Lucy liked so much as the smell and feel of fur. She immediately stepped into the wardrobe and got
in among the coats and rubbed her face against them, leaving the door open, of course, because she
knew that it is very foolish to shut oneself into any wardrobe. Soon she went further in and found that
there was a second row of coats hanging up behind the first one. It was almost quite dark in there and
she kept her arms stretched out in front of her so as not to bump her face into the back of the
wardrobe. She took a step further in - then two or three steps always expecting to feel woodwork
against the tips of her fingers. But she could not feel it.

"This must be a simply enormous wardrobe!" thought Lucy, going still further in and pushing the
soft folds of the coats aside to make room for her. Then she noticed that there was something
crunching under her feet. "I wonder is that more mothballs?" she thought, stooping down to feel it
with her hand. But instead of feeling the hard, smooth wood of the floor of the wardrobe, she felt
something soft and powdery and extremely cold. "This is very queer," she said, and went on a step or
two further.

Next moment she found that what was rubbing against her face and hands was no longer soft fur but
something hard and rough and even prickly. "Why, it is just like branches of trees!" exclaimed Lucy.
And then she saw that there was a light ahead of her; not a few inches away where the back of the
wardrobe ought to have been, but a long way off. Something cold and soft was falling on her. A
moment later she found that she was standing in the middle of a wood at night-time with snow under

Lucy felt a little frightened, but she felt very inquisitive and excited as well. She looked back over
her shoulder and there, between the dark tree trunks; she could still see the open doorway of the
wardrobe and even catch a glimpse of the empty room from which she had set out. (She had, of
course, left the door open, for she knew that it is a very silly thing to shut oneself into a wardrobe.) It
seemed to be still daylight there. "I can always get back if anything goes wrong," thought Lucy. She
began to walk forward, crunch-crunch over the snow and through the wood towards the other light. In
about ten minutes she reached it and found it was a lamp-post. As she stood looking at it, wondering
why there was a lamp-post in the middle of a wood and wondering what to do next, she heard a pitter
patter of feet coming towards her. And soon after that a very strange person stepped out from among
the trees into the light of the lamp-post.

He was only a little taller than Lucy herself and he carried over his head an umbrella, white with
snow. From the waist upwards he was like a man, but his legs were shaped like a goat's (the hair on
them was glossy black) and instead of feet he had goat's hoofs. He also had a tail, but Lucy did not
notice this at first because it was neatly caught up over the arm that held the umbrella so as to keep it
from trailing in the snow. He had a red woollen muffler round his neck and his skin was rather
reddish too. He had a strange, but pleasant little face, with a short pointed beard and curly hair, and
out of the hair there stuck two horns, one on each side of his forehead. One of his hands, as I have
said, held the umbrella: in the other arm he carried several brown-paper parcels. What with the
parcels and the snow it looked just as if he had been doing his Christmas shopping. He was a Faun.
And when he saw Lucy he gave such a start of surprise that he dropped all his parcels.

"GOOD EVENING," said Lucy. But the Faun was so busy picking up its parcels that at first it did
not reply. When it had finished it made her a little bow.

"My name's Lucy," said she, not quite understanding him.

"Of course I'm a girl," said Lucy.

"Of course I'm human," said Lucy, still a little puzzled.

"I am very pleased to meet you, Mr Tumnus," said Lucy.

"And may I ask, O Lucy Daughter of Eve," said Mr Tumnus, "how you have come into Narnia?"

"Narnia? What's that?" said Lucy.

"I - I got in through the wardrobe in the spare room," said Lucy.

"But they aren't countries at all," said Lucy, almost laughing. "It's only just back there - at least - I'm
not sure. It is summer there."

"Thank you very much, Mr Tumnus," said Lucy. "But I was wondering whether I ought to be getting
back."

"Well, it's very kind of you," said Lucy. "But I shan't be able to stay long."

And so Lucy found herself walking through the wood arm in arm with this strange creature as if they
had known one another all their lives.

They had not gone far before they came to a place where the ground became rough and there were
rocks all about and little hills up and little hills down. At the bottom of one small valley Mr Tumnus
turned suddenly aside as if he were going to walk straight into an unusually large rock, but at the last
moment Lucy found he was leading her into the entrance of a cave. As soon as they were inside she
found herself blinking in the light of a wood fire. Then Mr Tumnus stooped and took a flaming piece
of wood out of the fire with a neat little pair of tongs, and lit a lamp. "Now we shan't be long," he
said, and immediately put a kettle on.

Lucy thought she had never been in a nicer place. It was a little, dry, clean cave of reddish stone
with a carpet on the floor and two little chairs ("one for me and one for a friend," said Mr Tumnus)
and a table and a dresser and a mantelpiece over the fire and above that a picture of an old Faun with
a grey beard. In one corner there was a door which Lucy thought must lead to Mr Tumnus's bedroom,
and on one wall was a shelf full of books. Lucy looked at these while he was setting out the tea
things. They had titles like The Life and Letters of Silenus or Nymphs and Their Ways or Men,
Monks and Gamekeepers; a Study in Popular Legend or Is Man a Myth?

And really it was a wonderful tea. There was a nice brown egg, lightly boiled, for each of them, and
then sardines on toast, and then buttered toast, and then toast with honey, and then a sugar-topped
cake. And when Lucy was tired of eating the Faun began to talk. He had wonderful tales to tell of life
in the forest. He told about the midnight dances and how the Nymphs who lived in the wells and the
Dryads who lived in the trees came out to dance with the Fauns; about long hunting parties after the
milk-white stag who could give you wishes if you caught him; about feasting and treasure-seeking
with the wild Red Dwarfs in deep mines and caverns far beneath the forest floor; and then about
summer when the woods were green and old Silenus on his fat donkey would come to visit them, and
sometimes Bacchus himself, and then the streams would run with wine instead of water and the
whole forest would give itself up to jollification for weeks on end. "Not that it isn't always winter
now," he added gloomily. Then to cheer himself up he took out from its case on the dresser a strange
little flute that looked as if it were made of straw and began to play. And the tune he played made
Lucy want to cry and laugh and dance and go to sleep all at the same time. It must have been hours
later when she shook herself and said:

"No good?" said Lucy, jumping up and feeling rather frightened. "What do you mean? I've got to go
home at once. The others will be wondering what has happened to me." But a moment later she
asked, "Mr Tumnus! Whatever is the matter?" for the Faun's brown eyes had filled with tears and
then the tears began trickling down its cheeks, and soon they were running off the end of its nose; and
at last it covered its face with its hands and began to howl.

"Mr Tumnus! Mr Tumnus!" said Lucy in great distress. "Don't! Don't! What is the matter? Aren'
you well? Dear Mr Tumnus, do tell me what is wrong." But the Faun continued sobbing as if its heart
would break. And even when Lucy went over and put her arms round him and lent him her hand
kerchief, he did not stop. He merely took the handker chief and kept on using it, wringing it out with
both hands whenever it got too wet to be any more use, so that presently Lucy was standing in a
damp patch.

"Mr Tumnus!" bawled Lucy in his ear, shaking him. "Do stop. Stop it at once! You ought to be
ashamed of yourself, a great big Faun like you. What on earth are you crying about?"

"I don't think you're a bad Faun at all," said Lucy. "I think you are a very good Faun. You are the
nicest Faun I've ever met."

"But what have you done?" asked Lucy.

"A thing like what?" said Lucy.

"How awful!" said Lucy. "But what does she pay you for?"

"No," said Lucy. "I'm sure you wouldn't do anything of the sort."

"Well," said Lucy rather slowly (for she wanted to be truthful and yet not be too hard on him),
"well, that was pretty bad. But you're so sorry for it that I'm sure you will never do it again."

"What do you mean?" cried Lucy, turning very white.

"Oh, but you won't, Mr Tumnus," said Lucy. "Yo won't, will you? Indeed, indeed you really
mustn't."

"I'm very sorry, Mr Tumnus," said Lucy. "But please let me go home."

"I'm sure I can," said Lucy.

They both got up and left the tea things on the table, and Mr Tumnus once more put up his umbrella
and gave Lucy his arm, and they went out into the snow. The journey back was not at all like the
journey to the Faun's cave; they stole along as quickly as they could, without speaking a word, and
Mr Tumnus kept to the darkest places. Lucy was relieved when they reached the lamp-post again.

Lucy looked very hard between the trees and could just see in the distance a patch of light that
looked like daylight. "Yes," she said, "I can see the wardrobe door."

"Why, of course I can," said Lucy, shaking him heartily by the hand. "And I do hope you won't get
into dreadful trouble on my account."

"Rather!" said Lucy, and then ran towards the far off patch of daylight as quickly as her legs would
carry her. And presently instead of rough branch brushing past her she felt coats, and instead of
crunching snow under her feet she felt wooden board and all at once she found herself jumping out of
the wardrobe into the same empty room from which the whole adventure had started. She shut the
wardrobe door tightly behind her and looked around, panting for breath. It was still raining and she
could hear the voices of the others in the passage.

Lucy ran out of the empty room into the passage and found the other three.

"What on earth are you talking about, Lucy?" asked Susan.

"Why? said Lucy in amazement, "haven't you all been wondering where I was?"

"But I've been away for hours and hours," said Lucy.

"What I said," answered Lucy. "It was just after breakfast when I went into the wardrobe, and I've
been away for hours and hours, and had tea, and all sorts of things have happened."

"Don't be silly, Lucy," said Susan. "We've only just come out of that room a moment ago, and you
were there then."

The others did not know what to think, but Lucy was so excited that they all went back with her into
the room. She rushed ahead of them, flung open the door of the wardrobe and cried, "Now! go in and
see for yourselves."

Then everyone looked in and pulled the coats apart; and they all saw - Lucy herself saw - a perfectly
ordinary wardrobe. There was no wood and no snow, only the back of the wardrobe, with hooks on it.
Peter went in and rapped his knuckles on it to make sure that it was solid.

"But it wasn't a hoax at all," said Lucy, "really and truly. It was all different a moment ago. Honestly
it was. I promise."

Lucy grew very red in the face and tried to say something, though she hardly knew what she was
trying to say, and burst into tears.

For the next few days she was very miserable. She could have made it up with the others quite
easily at any moment if she could have brought herself to say that the whole thing was only a story
made up for fun. But Lucy was a very truthful girl and she knew that she was really in the right; and
she could not bring herself to say this. The others who thought she was telling a lie, and a silly lie too,
made her very unhappy. The two elder ones did this without meaning to do it, but Edmund could be
spiteful, and on this occasion he was spiteful. He sneered and jeered at Lucy and kept on asking her if
she'd found any other new countries in other cupboards all over the house. What made it worse was
that these days ought to have been delightful. The weather was fine and they were out of doors from
morning to night, bathing, fishing, climbing trees, and lying in the heather. But Lucy could not
properly enjoy any of it. And so things went on until the next wet day.

That day, when it came to the afternoon and there was still no sign of a break in the weather, they
decided to play hide-and-seek. Susan was "It" and as soon as the others scattered to hide, Lucy went
to the room where the wardrobe was. She did not mean to hide in the wardrobe, because she knew
that would only set the others talking again about the whole wretched business. But she did want to
have one more look inside it; for by this time she was beginning to wonder herself whether Narnia
and the Faun had not been a dream. The house was so large and complicated and full of hiding-places
that she thought she would have time to have one look into the wardrobe and then hide somewhere
else. But as soon as she reached it she heard steps in the passage outside, and then there was nothing
for it but to jump into the wardrobe and hold the door closed behind her. She did not shut it properly
because she knew that it is very silly to shut oneself into a wardrobe, even if it is not a magic one.

Now the steps she had heard were those of Edmund; and he came into the room just in time to see
Lucy vanishing into the wardrobe. He at once decided to get into it himself - not because he thought
it a particularly good place to hide but because he wanted to go on teasing her about her imaginary
country. He opened the door. There were the coats hanging up as usual, and a smell of mothballs, and
darkness and silence, and no sign of Lucy. "She thinks I'm Susan come to catch her," said Edmund to
himself, "and so she's keeping very quiet in at the back." He jumped in and shut the door, forgetting
what a very foolish thing this is to do. Then he began feeling about for Lucy in the dark. He had
expected to find her in a few seconds and was very surprised when he did not. He decided to open the
door again and let in some light. But he could not find the door either. He didn't like this at all and
began groping wildly in every direction; he even shouted out, "Lucy! Lu! Where are you? I know
you're here."

"Thank goodness," said Edmund, "the door must have swung open of its own accord." He forgot all
about Lucy and went towards the light, which he thought was the open door of the wardrobe. But
instead of finding himself stepping out into the spare room he found himself stepping out from the
shadow of some thick dark fir trees into an open place in the middle of a wood.

He now remembered that he had been looking for Lucy; and also how unpleasant he had been to her
about her "imaginary country" which now turned out not to have been imaginary at all. He thought
that she must be somewhere quite close and so he shouted, "Lucy! Lucy! I'm here too-Edmund."

"But I don't even know the way back to my own country," pleaded Edmund. "That's easy," answered
the Queen. "Do you see that lamp?" She pointed with her wand and Edmund turned and saw the same
lamp-post under which Lucy had met the Faun. "Straight on, beyond that, is the way to the World of
Men. And now look the other way'- here she pointed in the opposite direction - "and tell me if you
can see two little hills rising above the trees."

Edmund was still staring after the sledge when he heard someone calling his own name, and looking
round he saw Lucy coming towards him from another part of the wood.

"If I'd known you had got in I'd have waited for you," said Lucy, who was too happy and excited to
notice how snappishly Edmund spoke or how flushed and strange his face was. "I've been having
lunch with dear Mr Tumnus, the Faun, and he's very well and the White Witch has done nothing to
him for letting me go, so he thinks she can't have found out and perhaps everything is going to be all
right after all."

"She is a perfectly terrible person," said Lucy. "She calls herself the Queen of Narnia though she has
no right to be queen at all, and all the Fauns and Dryads and Naiads and Dwarfs and Animals - at
least all the good ones - simply hate her. And she can turn people into stone and do all kinds of
horrible things. And she has made a magic so that it is always winter in Narnia - always winter, but it
never gets to Christmas. And she drives about on a sledge, drawn by reindeer, with her wand in her
hand and a crown on her head."

"Mr Tumnus, the Faun," said Lucy.

"You can't always believe what Fauns say," said Edmund, trying to sound as if he knew far more
about them than Lucy.

"Who said so?" asked Lucy.

"Yes, let's," said Lucy. "Oh, Edmund, I am glad you've got in too. The others will have to believe in
Narnia now that both of us have been there. What fun it will be!"

But Edmund secretly thought that it would not be as good fun for him as for her. He would have to
admit that Lucy had been right, before all the others, and he felt sure the others would all be on the
side of the Fauns and the animals; but he was already more than half on the side of the Witch. He did
not know what he would say, or how he would keep his secret once they were all talking about
Narnia.

"I say," said Lucy, "you do look awful, Edmund. Don't you feel well?"

"Come on then," said Lucy, "let's find the others. What a lot we shall have to tell them! And what
wonderful adventures we shall have now that we're all in it together."

BECAUSE the game of hide-and-seek was still going on, it took Edmund and Lucy some time to

find the others. But when at last they were all together (which happened in the long room, where the
suit of armour was) Lucy burst out:

And now we come to one of the nastiest things in this story. Up to that moment Edmund had been
feeling sick, and sulky, and annoyed with Lucy for being right, but he hadn't made up his mind what
to do. When Peter suddenly asked him the question he decided all at once to do the meanest and most
spiteful thing he could think of. He decided to let Lucy down.

And Edmund gave a very superior look as if he were far older than Lucy (there was really only a
year's difference) and then a little snigger and said, "Oh, yes, Lucy and I have been playing pretending that all her story about a country in the wardrobe is true. just for fun, of course. There's
nothing there really."

Poor Lucy gave Edmund one look and rushed out of the room.

"Do stop it," said Susan; "it won't make things any better having a row between you two. Let's go
and find Lucy."

It was not surprising that when they found Lucy, a good deal later, everyone could see that she had
been crying. Nothing they could say to her made any difference. She stuck to her story and said:

It was an unpleasant evening. Lucy was miserable and Edmund was beginning to feel that his plan
wasn't working as well as he had expected. The two older ones were really beginning to think that
Lucy was out of her mind. They stood in the passage talking about it in whispers long after she had
gone to bed.

"That's just the funny thing about it, sir," said Peter. "Up till now, I'd have said Lucy every time."

"We were afraid it mightn't even be lying," said Susan; "we thought there might be something wrong
with Lucy."

"Well, for one thing," said Peter, "if it was true why doesn't everyone find this country every time
they go to the wardrobe? I mean, there was nothing there when we looked; even Lucy didn't pretend
the was."

"But there was no time," said Susan. "Lucy had no time to have gone anywhere, even if there was
such a place. She came running after us the very moment we were out of the room. It was less than
minute, and she pretended to have been away for hours."

After this things were a good deal better for Lucy. Peter saw to it that Edmund stopped jeering at
her, and neither she nor anyone else felt inclined to talk about the wardrobe at all. It had become a
rather alarming subject. And so for a time it looked as if all the adventures were coming to an end;
but that was not to be.

"By Jove, you're right," said Peter, "and look there - and there. It's trees all round. And this wet stuff
is snow. Why, I do believe we've got into Lucy's wood after all."

Peter turned at once to Lucy.

"Of course," said Lucy, and did.

"We can pretend we are Arctic explorers," said Lucy.

"What about going to see Mr Tumnus?" said Lucy. "He's the nice Faun I told you about."

Everyone agreed to this and off they went walking briskly and stamping their feet. Lucy proved a
good leader. At first she wondered whether she would be able to find the way, but she recognised an
oddlooking tree on one place and a stump in another and brought them on to where the ground
became uneven and into the little valley and at last to the very door of Mr Tumnus's cave. But there a
terrible surprise awaited them.

"She isn't a real queen at all," answered Lucy; "she's a horrible witch, the White Witch. Everyone all
the wood people - hate her. She has made an enchantment over the whole country so that it is always
winter here and never Christmas."

"Oh, but we can't, we can't," said Lucy suddenly; "don't you see? We can't just go home, not after
this. It is all on my account that the poor Faun has got into this trouble. He hid me from the Witch
and showed me the way back. That's what it means by comforting the Queen's enemies and
fraternizing with Humans. We simply must try to rescue him."

They were all still wondering what to do next, when Lucy said, "Look! There's a robin, with such a
red breast. It's the first bird I've seen here. I say! - I wonder can birds talk in Narnia? It almost looks
as if it wanted to say something to us." Then she turned to the Robin and said, "Please, can you tell us
where Tumnus the Faun has been taken to?" As she said this she took a step towards the bird. It at
once flew away but only as far as to the next tree. There it perched and looked at them very hard as if
it understood all they had been saying. Almost without noticing that they had done so, the four
children went a step or two nearer to it. At this the Robin flew away again to the next tree and once
more looked at them very hard. (You couldn't have found a robin with a redder chest or a brighter
eye.)

"Do you know," said Lucy, "I really believe he means us to follow him."

"The Faun saved Lucy."

"The robin!" cried Lucy, "the robin. It's flown away." And so it had - right out of sight.

"What is it?" asked Lucy, trying very hard not to sound nervous.

"What's it like?" said Lucy.

"I think it's a nice beaver," said Lucy.

"Quite right, quite right," said the Beaver. "Here is my token." With these words it held up to them a
little white object. They all looked at it in surprise, till suddenly Lucy said, "Oh, of course. It's my
handkerchief - the one I gave to poor Mr Tumnus."

in its inside. Edmund felt a sensation of mysterious horror. Peter felt suddenly brave and adventurous.
Susan felt as if some delicious smell or some delightful strain of music had just floated by her. And
Lucy got the feeling you have when you wake up in the morning and realize that it is the beginning of
the holidays or the beginning of summer.

"And what about Mr Tumnus," said Lucy; "where is he?"

The first thing Lucy noticed as she went in was a burring sound, and the first thing she saw was a
kindlooking old she-beaver sitting in the corner with a thread in her mouth working busily at her
sewing machine, and it was from it that the sound came. She stopped her work and got up as soon as
the children came in.

Meanwhile the girls were helping Mrs Beaver to fill the kettle and lay the table and cut the bread
and put the plates in the oven to heat and draw a huge jug of beer for Mr Beaver from a barrel which
stood in one corner of the house, and to put on the frying-pan and get the dripping hot. Lucy thought
the Beavers had a very snug little home though it was not at all like Mr Tumnus's cave. There were
no books or pictures, and instead of beds there were bunks, like on board ship, built into the wall.
And there were hams and strings of onions hanging from the roof, and against the walls were gum
boots and oilskins and hatchets and pairs of shears and spades and trowels and things for carrying
mortar in and fishing-rods and fishing-nets and sacks. And the cloth on the table, though very clean,
was very rough.

Just as the frying-pan was nicely hissing Peter and Mr Beaver came in with the fish which Mr
Beaver had already opened with his knife and cleaned out in the open air. You can think how good
the new-caught fish smelled while they were frying and how the hungry children longed for them to
be done and how very much hungrier still they had become before Mr Beaver said, "Now we're
nearly ready." Susan drained the potatoes and then put them all back in the empty pot to dry on the
side of the range while Lucy was helping Mrs Beaver to dish up the trout, so that in a very few
minutes everyone was drawing up their stools (it was all three-legged stools in the Beavers' house
except for Mrs Beaver's own special rockingchair beside the fire) and preparing to enjoy themselves.
There was a jug of creamy milk for the children (Mr Beaver stuck to beer) and a great big lump of
deep yellow butter in the middle of the table from which everyone took as much as he wanted to go
with his potatoes, and all the children thought - and I agree with them - that there's nothing to beat
good freshwater fish if you eat it when it has been alive half an hour ago and has come out of the pan
half a minute ago. And when they had finished the fish Mrs Beaver brought unexpectedly out of the
oven a great and gloriously sticky marmalade roll, steaming hot, and at the same time moved the
kettle on to the fire, so that when they had finished the marmalade roll the tea was made and ready to
be poured out. And when each person had got his (or her) cup of tea, each person shoved back his (or
her) stool so as to be able to lean against the wall and gave a long sigh of contentment.

"AND now," said Lucy, "do please tell us what's happened to Mr Tumnus."

"But where's he been taken to?" asked Lucy.

"But what'll they do to him, Mr Beaver?" gasped Lucy.

"But, Mr Beaver," said Lucy, "can't we - I mean we must do something to save him. It's too dreadful
and it's all on my account."

"Is-is he a man?" asked Lucy.

"Then he isn't safe?" said Lucy.

"Where's that?" said Lucy.

"But meanwhile what about poor Mr Tumnus?" said Lucy.

All the children had been attending so hard to what Mr Beaver was telling them that they had noticed
nothing else for a long time. Then during the moment of silence that followed his last remark, Lucy
suddenly said:

"Yes," said Lucy, almost in a whisper. "I'm afraid he has."

"Well, no, he didn't," said Lucy.

"How do you mean?" said Lucy.

"Oh, can no one help us?" wailed Lucy.

"I don't remember his being here when we were talking about Aslan -" began Peter, but Lucy
interrupted him.

He found himself in a long gloomy hall with many pillars, full, as the courtyard had been, of statues.
The one nearest the door was a little faun with a very sad expression on its face, and Edmund couldn't
help wondering if this might be Lucy's friend. The only light came from a single lamp and close
beside this sat the White Witch.

"And don't you start fussing either, Mr Beaver," said his wife. "There. That's better. There's five
loads and the smallest for the smallest of us: that's you, my dear," she added, looking at Lucy.

"Oh, do please come on," said Lucy.

The snow had stopped and the moon had come out when they began their journey. They went in
single file - first Mr Beaver, then Lucy, then Peter, then Susan, and Mrs Beaver last of all. Mr Beaver
led them across the dam and on to the right bank of the river and then along a very rough sort of path
among the trees right down by the river-bank. The sides of the valley, shining in the moonlight,
towered up far above them on either hand. "Best keep down here as much as possible," he said.
"She'll have to keep to the top, for you couldn't bring a sledge down here."

It would have been a pretty enough scene to look at it through a window from a comfortable
armchair; and even as things were, Lucy enjoyed it at first. But as they went on walking and walking
- and walking and as the sack she was carrying felt heavier and heavier, she began to wonder how she
was going to keep up at all. And she stopped looking at the dazzling brightness of the frozen river
with all its waterfalls of ice and at the white masses of the tree-tops and the great glaring moon and
the countless stars and could only watch the little short legs of Mr Beaver going pad-pad-pad-pad
through the snow in front of her as if they were never going to stop. Then the moon disappeared and
the snow began to fall once more. And at last Lucy was so tired that she was almost asleep and
walking at the same time when suddenly she found that Mr Beaver had turned away from the riverbank to the right and was leading them steeply uphill into the very thickest bushes. And then as she
came fully awake she found that Mr Beaver was just vanishing into a little hole in the bank which had
been almost hidden under the bushes until you were quite on top of it. In fact, by the time she realised
what was happening, only his short flat tail was showing.

Lucy immediately stooped down and crawled in after him. Then she heard noises of scrambling and
puffing and panting behind her and in a moment all five of them were inside.

It wasn't nearly such a nice cave as Mr Tumnus's, Lucy thought - just a hole in the ground but dry
and earthy. It was very small so that when they all lay down they were all a bundle of clothes
together, and what with that and being warmed up by their long walk they were really rather snug. If
only the floor of the cave had been a little smoother! Then Mrs Beaver handed round in the dark a
little flask out of which everyone drank something - it made one cough and splutter a little and stung
the throat, but it also made you feel deliciously warm after you'd swallowed it and everyone went
straight to sleep.

It seemed to Lucy only the next minute (though really it was hours and hours later) when she woke
up feeling a little cold and dreadfully stiff and thinking how she would like a hot bath. Then she felt a
set of long whiskers tickling her cheek and saw the cold daylight coming in through the mouth of the
cave. But immediately after that she was very wide awake indeed, and so was everyone else. In fact
they were all sitting up with their mouths and eyes wide open listening to a sound which was the very
sound they'd all been thinking of (and sometimes imagining they heard) during their walk last night.
It was a sound of jingling bells.

Mr Beaver was out of the cave like a flash the moment he heard it. Perhaps you think, as Lucy
thought for a moment, that this was a very silly thing to do? But it was really a very sensible one. He
knew he could scramble to the top of the bank among bushes and brambles without being seen; and
he wanted above all things to see which way the Witch's sledge went. The others all sat in the cave
waiting and wondering. They waited nearly five minutes. Then they heard something that frightened
them very much. They heard voices. "Oh," thought Lucy, "he's been seen. She's caught him!"

And Lucy felt running through her that deep shiver of gladness which you only get if you are being
solemn and still.

Last of all he said, "Lucy, Eve's Daughter," and Lucy came forward. He gave her a little bottle of
what looked like glass (but people said afterwards that it was made of diamond) and a small dagger.
"In this bottle," he said, "there is cordial made of the juice of one of the fireflowers that grow in the
mountains of the sun. If you or any of your friends is hurt, a few drops of this restore them. And the
dagger is to defend yourse at great need. For you also are not to be in battle."

"Why, sir?" said Lucy. "I think - I don't know but I think I could be brave enough."

"Not long now," said Mr Beaver, and began leading them uphill across some very deep, springy
moss (it felt nice under their tired feet) in a place where only tall trees grew, very wide apart. The
climb, coming at the end of the long day, made them all pant and blow. And just as Lucy was
wondering whether she could really get to the top without another long rest, suddenly they were at
the top. And this is what they saw.

"Welcome, Peter, Son of Adam," said Aslan. "Welcome, Susan and Lucy, Daughters of Eve.
Welcome He-Beaver and She-Beaver."

"Please - Aslan," said Lucy, "can anything be done to save Edmund?"

"All shall be done," said Aslan. "But it may be harder than you think." And then he was silent again
for some time. Up to that moment Lucy had been thinking how royal and strong and peaceful his face
looked; now it suddenly came into her head that he looked sad as well. But next minute that
expression was quite gone. The Lion shook his mane and clapped his paws together ("Terrible paws,"
thought Lucy, "if he didn't know how to velvet them!") and said,

The Naiads and Dryads were scattering in every direction. Lucy was running towards him as fast as
her short legs would carry her and her face was as white as paper. Then he saw Susan make a dash
for a tree, and swing herself up, followed by a huge grey beast. At first Peter thought it was a bear.
Then he saw that it looked like an Alsatian, though it was far too big to be a dog. Then he realised
that it was a wolf - a wolf standing on its hind legs, with its front paws against the tree-trunk,
snapping and snarling. All the hair on its back stood up on end. Susan had not been able to get higher
than the second big branch. One of her legs hung down so that her foot was only an inch or two

This was agreed to and two leopards went back with the dwarf to see that the conditions were
properly carried out. "But supposing she turns the two leopards into stone?" whispered Lucy to Peter.
I think the same idea had occurred to the leopards themselves; at any rate, as they walked off their fur
was all standing up on their backs and their tails were bristling - like a cat's when it sees a strange
dog.

They all obeyed. It was a terrible time this - waiting and wondering while the Lion and the Witch
talked earnestly together in low voices. Lucy said, "Oh, Edmund!" and began to cry. Peter stood with

For the last part of the journey it was Susan and Lucy who saw most of him. He did not talk very
much and seemed to them to be sad.

This feeling affected Susan so much that she couldn't get to sleep when she went to bed. And after
she had lain counting sheep and turning over and over she heard Lucy give a long sigh and turn over
just beside her in the darkness.

"No," said Lucy. "I thought you were asleep. I say, Susan!"

"Something about Aslan," said Lucy. "Either some dreadful thing is going to happen to him, or
something dreadful that he's going to do."

"There's been something wrong with him all afternoon," said Susan. "Lucy! What was that he said
about not being with us at the battle? You don't think he could be stealing away and leaving us
tonight, do you?"

"Where is he now?" said Lucy. "Is he here in the pavilion?"

Very quietly the two girls groped their way among the other sleepers and crept out of the tent. The
moonlight was bright and everything was quite still except for the noise of the river chattering over
the stones. Then Susan suddenly caught Lucy's arm and said, "Look!" On the far side of the camping
ground, just where the trees began, they saw the Lion slowly walking away from them into the wood.
Without a word they both followed him.

"We couldn't sleep," said Lucy - and then felt sure that she need say no more and that Aslan knew all
they had been thinking.

"Aslan! Dear Aslan!" said Lucy, "what is wrong? Can't you tell us?"

And both the girls cried bitterly (though they hardly knew why) and clung to the Lion and kissed his
mane and his nose and his paws and his great, sad eyes. Then he turned from them and walked out on
to the top of the hill. And Lucy and Susan, crouching in the bushes, looked after him, and this is what
they saw.

Lucy and Susan held their breaths waiting for Aslan's roar and his spring upon his enemies. But it
never came. Four Hags, grinning and leering, yet also (at first) hanging back and half afraid of what
they had to do, had approached him. "Bind him, I say!" repeated the White Witch. The Hags made a
dart at him and shrieked with triumph when they found that he made no resistance at all. Then others
- evil dwarfs and apes - rushed in to help them, and between them they rolled the huge Lion over on
his back and tied all his four paws together, shouting and cheering as if they had done something
brave, though, had the Lion chosen, one of those paws could have been the death of them all. But he
made no noise, even when the enemies, straining and tugging, pulled the cords so tight that they cut
into his flesh. Then they began to drag him towards the Stone Table.

"Oh, how can they?" said Lucy, tears streaming down her cheeks. "The brutes, the brutes!" for now
that the first shock was over the shorn face of Aslan looked to her braver, and more beautiful, and
more patient than ever.

As soon as the wood was silent again Susan and Lucy crept out onto the open hill-top. The moon
was getting low and thin clouds were passing across her, but still they could see the shape of the Lion
lying dead in his bonds. And down they both knelt in the wet grass and kissed his cold face and
stroked his beautiful fur - what was left of it - and cried till they could cry no more. And then they
looked at each other and held each other's hands for mere loneliness and cried again; and then again
were silent. At last Lucy said,

I hope no one who reads this book has been quite as miserable as Susan and Lucy were that night;
but if you have been - if you've been up all night and cried till you have no more tears left in you you will know that there comes in the end a sort of quietness. You feel as if nothing was ever going
to happen again. At any rate that was how it felt to these two. Hours and hours seemed to go by in
this dead calm, and they hardly noticed that they were getting colder and colder. But at last Lucy
noticed two other things. One was that the sky on the east side of the hill was a little less dark than it
had been an hour ago. The other was some tiny movement going on in the grass at her feet. At first
she took no interest in this. What did it matter? Nothing mattered now! But at last she saw that
whatever-it-was had begun to move up the upright stones of the Stone Table. And now whateverthey-were were moving about on Aslan's body. She peered closer. They were little grey things.

"Wait!" said Lucy, who had been looking at them more closely still. "Can you see what they're
doing?"

"That's what I thought," said Lucy. "I think they're friendly mice. Poor little things - they don't
realize he's dead. They think it'll do some good untying him."

"I'm so cold," said Lucy.

"What's that?" said Lucy, clutching Susan's arm.

"They're doing something worse to Him," said Lucy. "Come on!" And she turned, pulling Susan
round with her.

"Oh, it's too bad," sobbed Lucy; "they might have left the body alone."

"Aren't you dead then, dear Aslan?" said Lucy.

"Oh, you're real, you're real! Oh, Aslan!" cried Lucy, and both girls flung themselves upon him and
covered him with kisses.

"Oh yes. Now?" said Lucy, jumping up and clapping her hands.

"Oh, children," said the Lion, "I feel my strength coming back to me. Oh, children, catch me if you
can!" He stood for a second, his eyes very bright, his limbs quivering, lashing himself with his tail.
Then he made a leap high over their heads and landed on the other side of the Table. Laughing,
though she didn't know why, Lucy scrambled over it to reach him. Aslan leaped again. A mad chase
began. Round and round the hill-top he led them, now hopelessly out of their reach, now letting them
almost catch his tail, now diving between them, now tossing them in the air with his huge and
beautifully velveted paws and catching them again, and now stopping unexpectedly so that all three
of them rolled over together in a happy laughing heap of fur and arms and legs. It was such a romp as
no one has ever had except in Narnia; and whether it was more like playing with a thunderstorm or
playing with a kitten Lucy could never make up her mind. And the funny thing was that when all
three finally lay together panting in the sun the girls no longer felt in the least tired or hungry or
thirsty.

"We have a long journey to go. You must ride on me." And he crouched down and the children
climbed on to his warm, golden back, and Susan sat first, holding on tightly to his mane and Lucy sat
behind holding on tightly to Susan. And with a great heave he rose underneath them and then shot
off, faster than any horse could go, down hill and into the thick of the forest.

"WHAT an extraordinary place!" cried Lucy. "All those stone animals -and people too! It's -it's like a
museum."

stone dwarf, which (as you remember) was standing a few feet from the lion with his back to it. Then
he pounced on a tall stone dryad which stood beyond the dwarf, turned rapidly aside to deal with a
stone rabbit on his right, and rushed on to two centaurs. But at that moment Lucy said,

Lucy looked and saw that Aslan had just breathed on the feet of the stone giant.

"That wasn't exactly what I meant," whispered Susan to Lucy. But it was too late to do anything
about it now even if Aslan would have listened to her. The change was already creeping up the

And into the interior they all rushed and for several minutes the whole of that dark, horrible, fusty
old castle echoed with the opening of windows and with everyone's voices crying out at once, "Don't
forget the dungeons - Give us a hand with this door! Here's another little winding stair - Oh! I say.
Here's a poor kangaroo. Call Aslan - Phew! How it smells in here - Look out for trap-doors - Up
here! There are a whole lot more on the landing!" But the best of all was when Lucy came rushing
upstairs shouting out,

A moment later Lucy and the little Faun were holding each other by both hands and dancing round
and round for joy. The little chap was none the worse for having been a statue and was of course very
interested in all she had to tell him.

"Yes, I have," said Lucy, standing on tip-toes and holding her handkerchief up as far as she could
reach.

"Thank you, Missie," said Giant Rumblebuffin, stooping down. Next moment Lucy got rather a
fright for she found herself caught up in mid-air between the Giant's finger and thumb. But just as she
was getting near his face he suddenly started and then put her gently back on the ground muttering,
"Bless me! I've picked up the little girl instead. I beg your pardon, Missie, I thought you was the
handkerchee!"

"No, no," said Lucy laughing, "here it is!" This time he managed to get it but it was only about the
same size to him that a saccharine tablet would be to you, so that when she saw him solemnly
rubbing it to and fro across his great red face, she said, "I'm afraid it's not much use to you, Mr
Rumblebuffin."

"What a nice giant he is!" said Lucy to Mr Tumnus.

a mile behind them, were following as fast as they could. The noise was like an English fox-hunt only
better because every now and then with the music of the hounds was mixed the roar of the other lion
and sometimes the far deeper and more awful roar of Aslan himself. Faster and faster they went as
the scent became easier and easier to follow. And then, just as they came to the last curve in a narrow,
winding valley, Lucy heard above all these noises another noise - a different one, which gave her a
queer feeling inside. It was a noise of shouts and shrieks and of the clashing of metal against metal.

Then they came out of the narrow valley and at once she saw the reason. There stood Peter and
Edmund and all the rest of Aslan's army fighting desperately against the crowd of horrible creatures
whom she had seen last night; only now, in the daylight, they looked even stranger and more evil and
more deformed. There also seemed to be far more of them. Peter's army - which had their backs to
her looked terribly few. And there werestatues dotted all over the battlefield, so apparently the Witch
had been using her wand. But she did not seem to be using it now. She was fighting with her stone
knife. It was Peter she was fightin - both of them going at it so hard that Lucy could hardly make out
what was happening; she only saw the stone knife and Peter's sword flashing so quickly that they
looked like three knives and three swords. That pair were in the centre. On each side the line
stretched out. Horrible things were happening wherever she looked.

"Off my back, children," shouted Aslan. And they both tumbled off. Then with a roar that shook all
Narnia from the western lamp-post to the shores of the eastern sea the great beast flung himself upon
the White Witch. Lucy saw her face lifted towards him for one second with an expression of terror
and amazement. Then Lion and Witch had rolled over together but with the Witch underneath; and at
the same moment all war-like creatures whom Aslan had led from the Witch's house rushed madly on
the enemy lines, dwarfs with their battleaxes, dogs with teeth, the Giant with his club (and his feet
also crushed dozens of the foe), unicorns with their horns, centaurs with swords and hoofs. And
Peter's tired army cheered, and the newcomers roared, and the enemy squealed and gibbered till the
wood re-echoed with the din of that onset.

THE battle was all over a few minutes after their arrival. Most of the enemy had been killed in the
first charge of Aslan and his -companions; and when those who were still living saw that the Witch
was dead they either gave themselves up or took to flight. The next thing that Lucy knew was that
Peter and Aslan were shaking hands. It was strange to her to see Peter looking as he looked now - his
face was so pale and stern and he seemed so much older.

"Quick, Lucy," said Aslan.

And then, almost for the first time, Lucy remembered the precious cordial that had been given her
for a Christmas present. Her hands trembled so much that she could hardly undo the stopper, but she
managed it in the end and poured a few drops into her brother's mouth.

"Yes, I know," said Lucy crossly. "Wait a minute."

"I'm sorry, Aslan," said Lucy, getting up and going with him. And for the next half-hour they were
busy - she attending to the wounded while he restored those who had been turned into stone. When at
last she was free to come back to Edmund she found him standing on his feet and not only healed of
his wounds but looking better than she had seen him look - oh, for ages; in fact ever since his first
term at that horrid school which was where he had begun to go wrong. He had become his real old
self again and could look you in the face. And there on the field of battle Aslan made him a knight.

"Does he know," whispered Lucy to Susan, "what Aslan did for him? Does he know what the
arrangement with the Witch really was?"

"Oughtn't he to be told?" said Lucy.

"All the same I think he ought to know," said Lucy. But at that moment they were interrupted.

That evening after tea the four children all managed to get down to the beach again and get their
shoes and stockings off and feel the sand between their toes. But next day was more solemn. For
then, in the Great Hall of Cair Paravel - that wonderful hall with the ivory roof and the west wall
hung with peacock's feathers and the eastern door which looks towards the sea, in the presence of all
their friends and to the sound of trumpets, Aslan solemnly crowned them and led them to the four
thrones amid deafening shouts of, "Long Live King Peter! Long Live Queen Susan! Long Live King
Edmund! Long Live Queen Lucy!"

And now, as you see, this story is nearly (but not quite) at an end. These two Kings and two Queens
governed Narnia well, and long and happy was their reign. At first much of their time was spent in
seeking out the remnants of the White Witch's army and destroying them, and indeed for a long time
there would be news of evil things lurking in the wilder parts of the forest - a haunting here and a
killing there, a glimpse of a werewolf one month and a rumour of a hag the next. But in the end all
that foul brood was stamped out. And they made good laws and kept the peace and saved good trees
from being unnecessarily cut down, and liberated young dwarfs and young satyrs from being sent to
school, and generally stopped busybodies and interferers and encouraged ordinary people who
wanted to live and let live. And they drove back the fierce giants (quite a different sort from Giant
Rumblebuffin) on the north of Narnia when these ventured across the frontier. And they entered into
friendship and alliance with countries beyond the sea and paid them visits of state and received visits
of state from them. And they themselves grew and changed as the years passed over them. And Peter
became a tall and deep-chested man and a great warrior, and he was called King Peter the
Magnificent. And Susan grew into a tall and gracious woman with black hair that fell almost to her
feet and the kings of the countries beyond the sea began to send ambassadors asking for her hand in
marriage. And she was called Susan the Gentle. Edmund was a graver and quieter man than Peter,
and great in council and judgement. He was called King Edmund the Just. But as for Lucy, she was
always gay and golden-haired, and all princes in those parts desired her to be their Queen, and her
own people called her Queen Lucy the Valiant.

"Sir," said Queen Lucy. "By likelihood when this post and this lamp were set here there were smaller
trees in the place, or fewer, or none. For this is a young wood and the iron post is old." And they
stood looking upon it. Then said King Edmund,

"And more," said Queen Lucy, "for it will not go out of my mind that if we pass this post and lantern
either we shall find strange adventures or else some great change of our fortunes."

"Sister," said Queen Lucy, "my royal brother speaks rightly. And it seems to me we should be
shamed if for any fearing or foreboding we turned back from following so noble a beast as now we
have in chase."

So these Kings and Queens entered the thicket, and before they had gone a score of paces they all
remembered that the thing they had seen was called a lamppost, and before they had gone twenty
more they noticed that they were. making their way not through branches but through coats. And next
moment they all came tumbling out of a wardrobe door into the empty room, and They were no
longer Kings and Queens in their hunting array but just Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy in their old
clothes. It was the same day and the same hour of the day on which they had all gone into the
wardrobe to hide. Mrs Macready and the visitors were still talking in the passage; but luckily they
never came into the empty room and so the children weren't caught.

