ONCE there were four children whose names were Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy. This story is
about something that happened to them when they were sent away from London during the war
because of the air-raids. They were sent to the house of an old Professor who lived in the heart of the
country, ten miles from the nearest railway station and two miles from the nearest post office. He had
no wife and he lived in a very large house with a housekeeper called Mrs Macready and three
servants. (Their names were Ivy, Margaret and Betty, but they do not come into the story much.) He
himself was a very old man with shaggy white hair which grew over most of his face as well as on his
head, and they liked him almost at once; but on the first evening when he came out to meet them at
the front door he was so odd-looking that Lucy (who was the youngest) was a little afraid of him, and
Edmund (who was the next youngest) wanted to laugh and had to keep on pretending he was blowing
his nose to hide it.

"We've fallen on our feet and no mistake," said Peter. "This is going to be perfectly splendid. That
old chap will let us do anything we like."

"No there won't," said Peter. "I tell you this is the sort of house where no one's going to mind what
we do. Anyway, they won't hear us. It's about ten minutes' walk from here down to that dining-room,
and any amount of stairs and passages in between."

"It's an owl," said Peter. "This is going to be a wonderful place for birds. I shall go to bed now. I
say, let's go and explore tomorrow. You might find anything in a place like this. Did you see those
mountains as we came along? And the woods? There might be eagles. There might be stags. There'll
be hawks."

"Not for me” said Peter; "I'm going to explore in the house."

"Nothing there!" said Peter, and they all trooped out again - all except Lucy. She stayed behind
because she thought it would be worth while trying the door of the wardrobe, even though she felt
almost sure that it would be locked. To her surprise it opened quite easily, and two moth-balls
dropped out.

"So you've been hiding, have you?" said Peter. "Poor old Lu, hiding and nobody noticed! You'll have
to hide longer than that if you want people to start looking for you."

"What do you mean, Lu?" asked Peter.

"She's not being silly at all," said Peter, "she's just making up a story for fun, aren't you, Lu? And
why shouldn't she?"

"No, Peter, I'm not," she said. "It's - it's a magic wardrobe. There's a wood inside it, and it's snowing,
and there's a Faun and a Witch and it's called Narnia; come and see."

Then everyone looked in and pulled the coats apart; and they all saw - Lucy herself saw - a perfectly
ordinary wardrobe. There was no wood and no snow, only the back of the wardrobe, with hooks on it.
Peter went in and rapped his knuckles on it to make sure that it was solid.

"Come, Lu," said Peter, "that's going a bit far. You've had your joke. Hadn't you better drop it now?"

"Peter! Susan! It's all true. Edmund has seen it too. There is a country you can get to through the
wardrobe. Edmund and I both got in. We met one another in there, in the wood. Go on, Edmund; tell
them all about it."

"What's all this about, Ed?" said Peter.

And now we come to one of the nastiest things in this story. Up to that moment Edmund had been
feeling sick, and sulky, and annoyed with Lucy for being right, but he hadn't made up his mind what
to do. When Peter suddenly asked him the question he decided all at once to do the meanest and most
spiteful thing he could think of. He decided to let Lucy down.

"Look here," said Peter, turning on him savagely, "shut up! You've been perfectly beastly to Lu ever
since she started this nonsense about the wardrobe, and now you go playing games with her about it
and setting her off again. I believe you did it simply out of spite."

"Of course it's all nonsense," said Peter, "that's just the point. Lu was perfectly all right when we left
home, but since we've been down here she seems to be either going queer in the head or else turning
into a most frightful liar. But whichever it is, what good do you think you'll do by jeering and
nagging at her one day and encouraging her the next?"

"You didn't think anything at all," said Peter; "it's just spite. You've always liked being beastly to
anyone smaller than yourself; we've seen that at school before now."

The result was the next morning they decided that they really would go and tell the whole thing to
the Professor. "He'll write to Father if he thinks there is really something wrong with Lu," said Peter;
"it's getting beyond us." So they went and knocked at the study door, and the Professor said "Come
in," and got up and found chairs for them and said he was quite at their disposal. Then he sat listening
to them with the tips of his fingers pressed together and never interrupting, till they had finished the
whole story. After that he said nothing for quite a long time. Then he cleared his throat and said the
last thing either of them expected:

"That's just the funny thing about it, sir," said Peter. "Up till now, I'd have said Lucy every time."

"Well," said Susan, "in general, I'd say the same as Peter, but this couldn't be true - all this about the
wood and the Faun."

"But how could it be true, sir?" said Peter.

"Well, for one thing," said Peter, "if it was true why doesn't everyone find this country every time
they go to the wardrobe? I mean, there was nothing there when we looked; even Lucy didn't pretend
the was."

"Are they?" said the Professor; and Peter did'nt know quite what to say.

"But do you really mean, sir," said Peter, "that there could be other worlds - all over the place, just
round the corner - like that?"

After this things were a good deal better for Lucy. Peter saw to it that Edmund stopped jeering at
her, and neither she nor anyone else felt inclined to talk about the wardrobe at all. It had become a
rather alarming subject. And so for a time it looked as if all the adventures were coming to an end;
but that was not to be.

This house of the Professor's - which even he knew so little about - was so old and famous that
people from all over England used to come and ask permission to see over it. It was the sort of house
that is mentioned in guide books and even in histories; and well it might be, for all manner of stories
were told about it, some of them even stranger than the one I am telling you now. And when parties
of sightseers arrived and asked to see the house, the Professor always gave them permission, and Mrs
Macready, the housekeeper, showed them round, telling them about the pictures and the armour, and
the rare books in the library. Mrs Macready was not fond of children, and did not like to be
interrupted when she was telling visitors all the things she knew. She had said to Susan and Peter
almost on the first morning (along with a good many other instructions), "And please remember

A few mornings later Peter and Edmund were looking at the suit of armour and wondering if they
could take it to bits when the two girls rushed into the room and said, "Look out! Here comes the
Macready and a whole gang with her."

"Sharp's the word," said Peter, and all four made off through the door at the far end of the room. But
when they had got out into the Green Room and beyond it, into the Library, they suddenly heard
voices ahead of them, and realised that Mrs Macready must be bringing her party of sightseers up the
back stairs - instead of up the front stairs as they had expected. And after that - whether it was that
they lost their heads, or that Mrs Macready was trying to catch them, or that some magic in the house
had come to life and was chasing them into Narnia they seemed to find themselves being followed
everywhere, until at last Susan said, "Oh bother those trippers! Here - let's get into the Wardrobe
Room till they've passed. No one will follow us in there." But the moment they were inside they
heard the voices in the passage - and then someone fumbling at the door - and then they saw the
handle turning.

"Quick!" said Peter, "there's nowhere else," and flung open the wardrobe. All four of them bundled
inside it and sat there, panting, in the dark. Peter held the door closed but did not shut it; for, of
course, he remembered, as every sensible person does, that you should never never shut yourself up
in a wardrobe.

"There's something sticking into my back," said Peter.

"Now that you mention it, it is cold," said Peter, "and hang it all, it's wet too. What's the matter with
this place? I'm sitting on something wet. It's getting wetter every minute." He struggled to his feet.

"By Jove, you're right," said Peter, "and look there - and there. It's trees all round. And this wet stuff
is snow. Why, I do believe we've got into Lucy's wood after all."

Peter turned at once to Lucy.

"Do?" said Peter, "why, go and explore the wood, of course."

"They're not ours," said Peter doubtfully.

"I never thought of that, Su," said Peter. "Of course, now you put it that way, I see. No one could say
you had bagged a coat as long as you leave it in the wardrobe where you found it. And I suppose this
whole country is in the wardrobe."

"This is going to be exciting enough without pretending," said Peter, as he began leading the way
forward into the forest. There were heavy darkish clouds overhead and it looked as if there might be
more snow before night.

aiming for the lamp-post?" He had forgotten for the moment that he must pretend never to have been
in the wood before. The moment the words were out of his mouth he realised that he had given
himself away. Everyone stopped; everyone stared at him. Peter whistled.

There was a dead silence. "Well, of all the poisonous little beasts -" said Peter, and shrugged his
shoulders and said no more. There seemed, indeed, no more to say, and presently the four resumed
their journey; but Edmund was saying to himself, "I'll pay you all out for this, you pack of stuck-up,
selfsatisfied prigs."

"I think Lu ought to be the leader," said Peter; "goodness knows she deserves it. Where will you
take us, Lu?"

"What is this?" said Peter, stooping down. He had just noticed a piece of paper which had been
nailed through the carpet to the floor.

"Yes, I think there is," answered Peter, "but I can't read it in this light. Let's get out into the open
air."

They all went out in the daylight and crowded round Peter as he read out the following words:

"Who is this Queen, Lu?" said Peter. "Do you know anything about her?"

"Shut up - you!" said Peter, who was still very angry with Edmund. "What do you think, Susan?"

"That's what I feel too," said Peter. "I'm worried about having no food with us. I'd vote for going
back and getting something from the larder, only there doesn't seem to be any certainty of getting into
this country again when once you've got out of it. I think we'll have to go on."

"If only we knew where the poor chap was imprisoned!" said Peter.

"I've an idea he does," said Susan. "What do you think, Peter?"

"Well, we might as well try it," answered Peter.

The Robin appeared to understand the matter thoroughly. It kept going from tree to tree, always a
few yards ahead of them, but always so near that they could easily follow it. In this way it led them
on, slightly downhill. Wherever the Robin alighted a little shower of snow would fall off the branch.
Presently the clouds parted overhead and the winter sun came out and the snow all around them grew
dazzlingly bright. They had been travelling in this way for about half an hour, with the two girls in
front, when Edmund said to Peter, "if you're not still too high and mighty to talk to me, I've
something to say which you'd better listen to."

"What is it?" asked Peter.

"What?" said Peter, lowering his voice to a whisper.

"Great Scott!" said Peter, "I hadn't thought of that."

"And now what are we to do?" said Edmund, giving Peter a look which was as much as to say
"What did I tell you?"

"What?" said Peter.

"I saw it that time too," said Peter. "It's still there. It's just gone behind that big tree."

"Whatever it is," said Peter, "it's dodging us. It's something that doesn't want to be seen."

"Let's go home," said Susan. And then, though nobody said it out loud, everyone suddenly realised
the same fact that Edmund had whispered to Peter at the end of the last chapter. They were lost.

"I know what it is," said Peter; "it's a beaver. I saw the tail."

"I know," said Peter. "The question is, are we to go to it or not? What do you think, Lu?"

"Come on," said Peter,"let's give it a try. All keep close together. We ought to be a match for one
beaver if it turns out to be an enemy."

"We're some of them," said Peter.

"Why, who are you afraid of?" said Peter. "There's no one here but ourselves."

"Not meaning to be rude, Mr Beaver," added Peter, "but you see, we're strangers."

in its inside. Edmund felt a sensation of mysterious horror. Peter felt suddenly brave and adventurous.
Susan felt as if some delicious smell or some delightful strain of music had just floated by her. And
Lucy got the feeling you have when you wake up in the morning and realize that it is the beginning of
the holidays or the beginning of summer.

That was what the others chiefly noticed, but Edmund noticed something else. A little lower down
the river there was another small river which came down another small valley to join it. And looking
up that valley, Edmund could see two small hills, and he was almost sure they were the two hills
which the White Witch had pointed out to him when he parted from her at the lamp-post that other
day. And then between them, he thought, must be her palace, only a mile off or less. And he thought
about Turkish Delight and about being a King ("And I wonder how Peter will like that?" he asked
himself) and horrible ideas came into his head.

"That I will," said Mr Beaver, and he went out of the house (Peter went with him), and across the ice
of the deep pool to where he had a little hole in the ice which he kept open every day with his hatchet.
They took a pail with them. Mr Beaver sat down quietly at the edge of the hole (he didn't seem to
mind it being so chilly), looked hard into it, then suddenly shot in his paw, and before you could say
Jack Robinson had whisked out a beautiful trout. Then he did it all over again until they had a fine
catch of fish.

Just as the frying-pan was nicely hissing Peter and Mr Beaver came in with the fish which Mr
Beaver had already opened with his knife and cleaned out in the open air. You can think how good
the new-caught fish smelled while they were frying and how the hungry children longed for them to
be done and how very much hungrier still they had become before Mr Beaver said, "Now we're
nearly ready." Susan drained the potatoes and then put them all back in the empty pot to dry on the
side of the range while Lucy was helping Mrs Beaver to dish up the trout, so that in a very few
minutes everyone was drawing up their stools (it was all three-legged stools in the Beavers' house
except for Mrs Beaver's own special rockingchair beside the fire) and preparing to enjoy themselves.
There was a jug of creamy milk for the children (Mr Beaver stuck to beer) and a great big lump of
deep yellow butter in the middle of the table from which everyone took as much as he wanted to go
with his potatoes, and all the children thought - and I agree with them - that there's nothing to beat
good freshwater fish if you eat it when it has been alive half an hour ago and has come out of the pan
half a minute ago. And when they had finished the fish Mrs Beaver brought unexpectedly out of the
oven a great and gloriously sticky marmalade roll, steaming hot, and at the same time moved the
kettle on to the fire, so that when they had finished the marmalade roll the tea was made and ready to
be poured out. And when each person had got his (or her) cup of tea, each person shoved back his (or
her) stool so as to be able to lean against the wall and gave a long sigh of contentment.

"Couldn't we have some stratagem?" said Peter. "I mean couldn't we dress up as something, or
pretend to be - oh, pedlars or anything - or watch till she was gone out - or- oh, hang it all, there must

"I'm longing to see him," said Peter, "even if I do feel frightened when it comes to the point."

"That's what I don't understand, Mr Beaver," said Peter, "I mean isn't the Witch herself human?"

"What's that to do with it?" asked Peter.

"What on earth are we to do, Mr Beaver?" said Peter.

"We'd better divide into four search parties," said Peter, "and all go in different directions. Whoever
finds him must come back here at once and-"

"But will he know the way?" said Peter.

"All the same," said Peter in a rather choking sort of voice, "we'll still have to go and look for him.
He is our brother after all, even if he is rather a little beast. And he's only a kid."

"I don't remember his being here when we were talking about Aslan -" began Peter, but Lucy
interrupted him.

"So he did, by Jove," said Peter; "just the sort of thing he would say, too!"

You mustn't think that even now Edmund was quite so bad that he actually wanted his brother and
sisters to be turned into stone. He did want Turkish Delight and to be a Prince (and later a King) and
to pay Peter out for calling him a beast. As for what the Witch would do with the others, he didn't
want her to be particularly nice to them - certainly not to put them on the same level as himself; but
he managed to believe, or to pretend he believed, that she wouldn't do anything very bad to them,
"Because," he said to himself, "all these people who say nasty things about her are her enemies and
probably half of it isn't true. She was jolly nice to me, anyway, much nicer than they are. I expect she

It was pretty bad when he reached the far side. It was growing darker every minute and what with
that and the snowflakes swirling all round him he could hardly see three feet ahead. And then too
there was no road. He kept slipping into deep drifts of snow, and skidding on frozen puddles, and
tripping over fallen tree-trunks, and sliding down steep banks, and barking his shins against rocks, till
he was wet and cold and bruised all over. The silence and the loneliness were dreadful. In fact I really
think he might have given up the whole plan and gone back and owned up and made friends with the
others, if he hadn't happened to say to himself, "When I'm King of Narnia the first thing I shall do
will be to make some decent roads." And of course that set him off thinking about being a King and
all the other things he would do and this cheered him up a good deal. He had just settled in his mind
what sort of palace he would have and how many cars and all about his private cinema and where the
principal railways would run and what laws he would make against beavers and dams and was
putting the finishing touches to some schemes for keeping Peter in his place, when the weather
changed. First the snow stopped. Then a wind sprang up and it became freezing cold. Finally, the
clouds rolled away and the moon came out. It was a full moon and, shining on all that snow, it made
everything almost as bright as day - only the shadows were rather confusing.

He would never have found his way if the moon hadn't come out by the time he got to the other
river you remember he had seen (when they first arrived at the Beavers') a smaller river flowing into
the great one lower down. He now reached this and turned to follow it up. But the little valley down
which it came was much steeper and rockier than the one he had just left and much overgrown with
bushes, so that he could not have managed it at all in the dark. Even as it was, he got wet through for
he had to stoop under branches and great loads of snow came sliding off on to his back. And every
time this happened he thought more and more how he hated Peter - just as if all this had been Peter's
fault.

"But don't we want as big a start as we can possibly get," said Peter, "if we're to reach the Stone
Table before her?"

The snow had stopped and the moon had come out when they began their journey. They went in
single file - first Mr Beaver, then Lucy, then Peter, then Susan, and Mrs Beaver last of all. Mr Beaver
led them across the dam and on to the right bank of the river and then along a very rough sort of path
among the trees right down by the river-bank. The sides of the valley, shining in the moonlight,
towered up far above them on either hand. "Best keep down here as much as possible," he said.
"She'll have to keep to the top, for you couldn't bring a sledge down here."

"Wherever is this?" said Peter's voice, sounding tired and pale in the darkness. (I hope you know
what I mean by a voice sounding pale.)

"What do you mean, Mr Beaver?" panted Peter as they all scrambled up the steep bank of the valley
together.

"Peter, Adam's Son," said Father Christmas.

"Here, sir," said Peter.

"These are your presents," was the answer, "and they are tools not toys. The time to use them is
perhaps near at hand. Bear them well." With these words he handed to Peter a shield and a sword.
The shield was the colour of silver and across it there ramped a red lion, as bright as a ripe strawberry
at the moment when you pick it. The hilt of the sword was of gold and it had a sheath and a sword
belt and everything it needed, and it was just the right size and weight for Peter to use. Peter was
silent and solemn as he received these gifts, for he felt they were a very serious kind of present.

Peter had just drawn his sword out of its sheath and was showing it to Mr Beaver, when Mrs Beaver
said:

as if the Witch intended to make him a King. All the things he had said to make himself believe that
she was good and kind and that her side was really the right side sounded to him silly now. He would
have given anything to meet the others at this moment - even Peter! The only way to comfort himself
now was to try to believe that the whole thing was a dream and that he might wake up at any
moment. And as they went on, hour after hour, it did come to seem like a dream.

one could see in every direction - except right ahead. There, far to the East, was something twinkling
and moving. "By gum!" whispered Peter to Susan, "the sea!" In the very middle of this open hill-top
was the Stone Table. It was a great grim slab of grey stone supported on four upright stones. It looked
very old; and it was cut all over with strange lines and figures that might be the letters of an unknown
language. They gave you a curious feeling when you looked at them. The next thing they saw was a
pavilion pitched on one side of the open place. A wonderful pavilion it was - and especially now
when the light of the setting sun fell upon it - with sides of what looked like yellow silk and cords of
crimson and tent-pegs of ivory; and high above it on a pole a banner which bore a red rampant lion
fluttering in the breeze which was blowing in their faces from the far-off sea. While they were
looking at this they heard a sound of music on their right; and turning in that direction they saw what
they had come to see.

"No," whispered Peter, "you first."

"Susan," whispered Peter, "What about you? Ladies first."

"No, you're the eldest," whispered Susan. And of course the longer they went on doing this the more
awkward they felt. Then at last Peter realised that it was up to him. He drew his sword and raised it to

"Welcome, Peter, Son of Adam," said Aslan. "Welcome, Susan and Lucy, Daughters of Eve.
Welcome He-Beaver and She-Beaver."

"He has tried to betray them and joined the White Witch, O Aslan," said Mr Beaver. And then
something made Peter say,

And Aslan said nothing either to excuse Peter or to blame him but merely stood looking at him with
his great unchanging eyes. And it seemed to all of them that there was nothing to be said.

When the girls had gone Aslan laid his paw - and though it was velveted it was very heavy - on
Peter's shoulder and said, "Come, Son of Adam, and I will show you a far-off sight of the castle
where you are to be King."

And Peter with his sword still drawn in his hand went with the Lion to the eastern edge of the hilltop.
There a beautiful sight met their eyes. The sun was setting behind their backs. That meant that the
whole country below them lay in the evening light - forest and hills and valleys and, winding away
like a silver snake, the lower part of the great river. And beyond all this, miles away, was the sea, and
beyond the sea the sky, full of clouds which were just turning rose colour with the reflection of the
sunset. But just where the land of Narnia met the sea - in fact, at the mouth of the great river - there
was something on a little hill, shining. It was shining because it was a castle and of course the
sunlight was reflected from all the windows which looked towards Peter and the sunset; but to Peter it
looked like a great star resting on the seashore.

And once more Peter said nothing, for at that moment a strange noise woke the silence suddenly. It
was like a bugle, but richer.

"It is your sister's horn," said Aslan to Peter in a low voice; so low as to be almost a purr, if it is not
disrespectful to think of a Lion purring.

For a moment Peter did not understand. Then, when he saw all the other creatures start forward and
heard Aslan say with a wave of his paw, "Back! Let the Prince win his spurs," he did understand, and
set off running as hard as he could to the pavilion. And there he saw a dreadful sight.

The Naiads and Dryads were scattering in every direction. Lucy was running towards him as fast as
her short legs would carry her and her face was as white as paper. Then he saw Susan make a dash
for a tree, and swing herself up, followed by a huge grey beast. At first Peter thought it was a bear.
Then he saw that it looked like an Alsatian, though it was far too big to be a dog. Then he realised
that it was a wolf - a wolf standing on its hind legs, with its front paws against the tree-trunk,
snapping and snarling. All the hair on its back stood up on end. Susan had not been able to get higher
than the second big branch. One of her legs hung down so that her foot was only an inch or two

above the snapping teeth. Peter wondered why she did not get higher or at least take a better grip;
then he realised that she was just going to faint and that if she fainted she would fall off.

Peter did not feel very brave; indeed, he felt he was going to be sick. But that made no difference to
what he had to do. He rushed straight up to the monster and aimed a slash of his sword at its side.
That stroke never reached the Wolf. Quick as lightning it turned round, its eyes flaming, and its
mouth wide open in a howl of anger. If it had not been so angry that it simply had to howl it would
have got him by the throat at once. As it was - though all this happened too quickly for Peter to think
at all - he had just time to duck down and plunge his sword, as hard as he could, between the brute's
forelegs into its heart. Then came a horrible, confused moment like something in a nightmare. He was
tugging and pulling and the Wolf seemed neither alive nor dead, and its bared teeth knocked against
his forehead, and everything was blood and heat and hair. A moment later he found that the monster
lay dead and he had drawn his sword out of it and was straightening his back and rubbing the sweat
off his face and out of his eyes. He felt tired all over.

Then, after a bit, Susan came down the tree. She and Peter felt pretty shaky when they met and I
won't say there wasn't kissing and crying on both sides. But in Narnia no one thinks any the worse of
you for that.

Peter, still out of breath, turned and saw Aslan close at hand.

It was true. Peter blushed when he looked at the bright blade and saw it all smeared with the Wolf's
hair and blood. He stooped down and wiped it quite clean on the grass, and then wiped it quite dry on
his coat.

"Hand it to me and kneel, Son of Adam," said Aslan. And when Peter had done so he struck him
with the flat of the blade and said, "Rise up, Sir Peter Wolf's-Bane. And, whatever happens, never
forget to wipe your sword."

This was agreed to and two leopards went back with the dwarf to see that the conditions were
properly carried out. "But supposing she turns the two leopards into stone?" whispered Lucy to Peter.
I think the same idea had occurred to the leopards themselves; at any rate, as they walked off their fur
was all standing up on their backs and their tails were bristling - like a cat's when it sees a strange
dog.

"It'll be all right," whispered Peter in reply. "He wouldn't send them if it weren't."

They all obeyed. It was a terrible time this - waiting and wondering while the Lion and the Witch
talked earnestly together in low voices. Lucy said, "Oh, Edmund!" and began to cry. Peter stood with

During the first part of the journey Aslan explained to Peter his plan of campaign. "As soon as she
has finished her business in these parts," he said, "the Witch and her crew will almost certainly fall
back to her House and prepare for a siege. You may or may not be able to cut her off and prevent her
from reaching it." He then went on to outline two plans of battle - one for fighting the Witch and her
people in the wood and another for assaulting her castle. And all the time he was advising Peter how
to conduct the operations, saying things like, "You must put your Centaurs in such and such a place"
or "You must post scouts to see that she doesn't do so-and-so," till at last Peter said,

"I can give you no promise of that," answered the Lion. And he continued giving Peter his
instructions.

It was still afternoon when they came down to a place where the river valley had widened out and
the river was broad and shallow. This was the Fords of Beruna and Aslan gave orders to halt on this
side of the water. But Peter said,

Aslan, who seemed to have been thinking about something else, roused himself with a shake of his
magnificent mane and said, "Eh? What's that?" Peter said it all over again.

Aslan's mood affected everyone that evening. Peter was feeling uncomfortable too at the idea of
fighting the battle on his own; the news that Aslan might not be there had come as a great shock to
him. Supper that evening was a quiet meal. Everyone felt how different it had been last night or even
that morning. It was as if the good times, having just begun, were already drawing to their end.

Then they came out of the narrow valley and at once she saw the reason. There stood Peter and
Edmund and all the rest of Aslan's army fighting desperately against the crowd of horrible creatures
whom she had seen last night; only now, in the daylight, they looked even stranger and more evil and
more deformed. There also seemed to be far more of them. Peter's army - which had their backs to
her looked terribly few. And there werestatues dotted all over the battlefield, so apparently the Witch
had been using her wand. But she did not seem to be using it now. She was fighting with her stone
knife. It was Peter she was fightin - both of them going at it so hard that Lucy could hardly make out
what was happening; she only saw the stone knife and Peter's sword flashing so quickly that they
looked like three knives and three swords. That pair were in the centre. On each side the line
stretched out. Horrible things were happening wherever she looked.

"Off my back, children," shouted Aslan. And they both tumbled off. Then with a roar that shook all
Narnia from the western lamp-post to the shores of the eastern sea the great beast flung himself upon
the White Witch. Lucy saw her face lifted towards him for one second with an expression of terror
and amazement. Then Lion and Witch had rolled over together but with the Witch underneath; and at
the same moment all war-like creatures whom Aslan had led from the Witch's house rushed madly on
the enemy lines, dwarfs with their battleaxes, dogs with teeth, the Giant with his club (and his feet
also crushed dozens of the foe), unicorns with their horns, centaurs with swords and hoofs. And
Peter's tired army cheered, and the newcomers roared, and the enemy squealed and gibbered till the
wood re-echoed with the din of that onset.

THE battle was all over a few minutes after their arrival. Most of the enemy had been killed in the
first charge of Aslan and his -companions; and when those who were still living saw that the Witch
was dead they either gave themselves up or took to flight. The next thing that Lucy knew was that
Peter and Aslan were shaking hands. It was strange to her to see Peter looking as he looked now - his
face was so pale and stern and he seemed so much older.

"It was all Edmund's doing, Aslan," Peter was saying. "We'd have been beaten if it hadn't been for

That evening after tea the four children all managed to get down to the beach again and get their
shoes and stockings off and feel the sand between their toes. But next day was more solemn. For
then, in the Great Hall of Cair Paravel - that wonderful hall with the ivory roof and the west wall
hung with peacock's feathers and the eastern door which looks towards the sea, in the presence of all
their friends and to the sound of trumpets, Aslan solemnly crowned them and led them to the four
thrones amid deafening shouts of, "Long Live King Peter! Long Live Queen Susan! Long Live King
Edmund! Long Live Queen Lucy!"

And now, as you see, this story is nearly (but not quite) at an end. These two Kings and two Queens
governed Narnia well, and long and happy was their reign. At first much of their time was spent in
seeking out the remnants of the White Witch's army and destroying them, and indeed for a long time
there would be news of evil things lurking in the wilder parts of the forest - a haunting here and a
killing there, a glimpse of a werewolf one month and a rumour of a hag the next. But in the end all
that foul brood was stamped out. And they made good laws and kept the peace and saved good trees
from being unnecessarily cut down, and liberated young dwarfs and young satyrs from being sent to
school, and generally stopped busybodies and interferers and encouraged ordinary people who
wanted to live and let live. And they drove back the fierce giants (quite a different sort from Giant
Rumblebuffin) on the north of Narnia when these ventured across the frontier. And they entered into
friendship and alliance with countries beyond the sea and paid them visits of state and received visits
of state from them. And they themselves grew and changed as the years passed over them. And Peter
became a tall and deep-chested man and a great warrior, and he was called King Peter the
Magnificent. And Susan grew into a tall and gracious woman with black hair that fell almost to her
feet and the kings of the countries beyond the sea began to send ambassadors asking for her hand in
marriage. And she was called Susan the Gentle. Edmund was a graver and quieter man than Peter,
and great in council and judgement. He was called King Edmund the Just. But as for Lucy, she was
always gay and golden-haired, and all princes in those parts desired her to be their Queen, and her
own people called her Queen Lucy the Valiant.

So they lived in great joy and if ever they remembered their life in this world it was only as one
remembers a dream. And one year it fell out that Tumnus (who was a middle-aged Faun by now and
beginning to be stout) came down river and brought them news that the White Stag had once more
appeared in his parts - the White Stag who would give you wishes if you caught him. So these two
Kings and two Queens with the principal members of their court, rode a-hunting with horns and
hounds in the Western Woods to follow the White Stag. And they had not hunted long before they
had a sight of him. And he led them a great pace over rough and smooth and through thick and thin,
till the horses of all the courtiers were tired out and these four were still following. And they saw the
stag enter into a thicket where their horses could not follow. Then said King Peter (for they talked in
quite a different style now, having been Kings and Queens for so long), "Fair Consorts, let us now
alight from our horses and follow this beast into the thicket; for in all my days I never hunted a nobler
quarry."

"By the Lion's Mane, a strange device," said King Peter, "to set a lantern here where the trees cluster
so thick about it and so high above it that if it were lit it should give light to no man!"

"And in mine, fair brother," said King Peter.

"Madam," said King Peter, "therein I pray thee to have me excused. For never since we four were
Kings and Queens in Narnia have we set our hands to any high matter, as battles, quests, feats of
arms, acts of justice, and the like, and then given over; but always what we have taken in hand, the
same we have achieved."

So these Kings and Queens entered the thicket, and before they had gone a score of paces they all
remembered that the thing they had seen was called a lamppost, and before they had gone twenty
more they noticed that they were. making their way not through branches but through coats. And next
moment they all came tumbling out of a wardrobe door into the empty room, and They were no
longer Kings and Queens in their hunting array but just Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy in their old
clothes. It was the same day and the same hour of the day on which they had all gone into the
wardrobe to hide. Mrs Macready and the visitors were still talking in the passage; but luckily they
never came into the empty room and so the children weren't caught.

