ONCE there were four children whose names were Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy. This story is
about something that happened to them when they were sent away from London during the war
because of the air-raids. They were sent to the house of an old Professor who lived in the heart of the
country, ten miles from the nearest railway station and two miles from the nearest post office. He had
no wife and he lived in a very large house with a housekeeper called Mrs Macready and three
servants. (Their names were Ivy, Margaret and Betty, but they do not come into the story much.) He
himself was a very old man with shaggy white hair which grew over most of his face as well as on his
head, and they liked him almost at once; but on the first evening when he came out to meet them at
the front door he was so odd-looking that Lucy (who was the youngest) was a little afraid of him, and
Edmund (who was the next youngest) wanted to laugh and had to keep on pretending he was blowing
his nose to hide it.

"I think he's an old dear," said Susan.

"Like what?" said Susan; "and anyway, it's time you were in bed."

"Rabbits!" said Susan.

"Do stop grumbling, Ed," said Susan. "Ten to one it'll clear up in an hour or so. And in the
meantime we're pretty well off. There's a wireless and lots of books."

"What on earth are you talking about, Lucy?" asked Susan.

"Don't be silly, Lucy," said Susan. "We've only just come out of that room a moment ago, and you
were there then."

"Why, you goose," said Susan, putting her head inside and pulling the fur coats apart, "it's just an
ordinary wardrobe; look! there's the back of it."

That day, when it came to the afternoon and there was still no sign of a break in the weather, they
decided to play hide-and-seek. Susan was "It" and as soon as the others scattered to hide, Lucy went
to the room where the wardrobe was. She did not mean to hide in the wardrobe, because she knew
that would only set the others talking again about the whole wretched business. But she did want to
have one more look inside it; for by this time she was beginning to wonder herself whether Narnia
and the Faun had not been a dream. The house was so large and complicated and full of hiding-places
that she thought she would have time to have one look into the wardrobe and then hide somewhere
else. But as soon as she reached it she heard steps in the passage outside, and then there was nothing
for it but to jump into the wardrobe and hold the door closed behind her. She did not shut it properly
because she knew that it is very silly to shut oneself into a wardrobe, even if it is not a magic one.

Now the steps she had heard were those of Edmund; and he came into the room just in time to see
Lucy vanishing into the wardrobe. He at once decided to get into it himself - not because he thought
it a particularly good place to hide but because he wanted to go on teasing her about her imaginary
country. He opened the door. There were the coats hanging up as usual, and a smell of mothballs, and
darkness and silence, and no sign of Lucy. "She thinks I'm Susan come to catch her," said Edmund to
himself, "and so she's keeping very quiet in at the back." He jumped in and shut the door, forgetting
what a very foolish thing this is to do. Then he began feeling about for Lucy in the dark. He had
expected to find her in a few seconds and was very surprised when he did not. He decided to open the
door again and let in some light. But he could not find the door either. He didn't like this at all and
began groping wildly in every direction; he even shouted out, "Lucy! Lu! Where are you? I know
you're here."

"Peter! Susan! It's all true. Edmund has seen it too. There is a country you can get to through the
wardrobe. Edmund and I both got in. We met one another in there, in the wood. Go on, Edmund; tell
them all about it."

"Tell us, Ed," said Susan.

"Do stop it," said Susan; "it won't make things any better having a row between you two. Let's go
and find Lucy."

"Oh, but -" began Susan, and then stopped. Anyone could see from the old man's face that he was
perfectly serious. Then Susan pulled herself together and said, "But Edmund said they had only been
pretending."

"And what do you think, my dear?" said the Professor, turning to Susan.

"Well," said Susan, "in general, I'd say the same as Peter, but this couldn't be true - all this about the
wood and the Faun."

"We were afraid it mightn't even be lying," said Susan; "we thought there might be something wrong
with Lucy."

"But then," said Susan, and stopped. She had never dreamed that a grown-up would talk like the
Professor and didn't know what to think.

Susan looked at him very hard and was quite sure from the expression on his face that he was no
making fun of them.

"But there was no time," said Susan. "Lucy had no time to have gone anywhere, even if there was
such a place. She came running after us the very moment we were out of the room. It was less than
minute, and she pretended to have been away for hours."

"But what are we to do?" said Susan. She felt that the conversation was beginning to get off the
point.

"What's that?" said Susan.

This house of the Professor's - which even he knew so little about - was so old and famous that
people from all over England used to come and ask permission to see over it. It was the sort of house
that is mentioned in guide books and even in histories; and well it might be, for all manner of stories
were told about it, some of them even stranger than the one I am telling you now. And when parties
of sightseers arrived and asked to see the house, the Professor always gave them permission, and Mrs
Macready, the housekeeper, showed them round, telling them about the pictures and the armour, and
the rare books in the library. Mrs Macready was not fond of children, and did not like to be
interrupted when she was telling visitors all the things she knew. She had said to Susan and Peter
almost on the first morning (along with a good many other instructions), "And please remember

"Sharp's the word," said Peter, and all four made off through the door at the far end of the room. But
when they had got out into the Green Room and beyond it, into the Library, they suddenly heard
voices ahead of them, and realised that Mrs Macready must be bringing her party of sightseers up the
back stairs - instead of up the front stairs as they had expected. And after that - whether it was that
they lost their heads, or that Mrs Macready was trying to catch them, or that some magic in the house
had come to life and was chasing them into Narnia they seemed to find themselves being followed
everywhere, until at last Susan said, "Oh bother those trippers! Here - let's get into the Wardrobe
Room till they've passed. No one will follow us in there." But the moment they were inside they
heard the voices in the passage - and then someone fumbling at the door - and then they saw the
handle turning.

"I wish the Macready would hurry up and take all these people away," said Susan presently, "I'm
getting horribly cramped."

"I expect the pockets of these coats are full of it," said Susan, "to keep away the moths."

"And isn't it cold?" said Susan.

"O-o-oh!" said Susan suddenly, and everyone asked her what was the matter.

"I'm sitting against a tree," said Susan, "and look! It's getting light - over there."

"And now," said Susan, "what do we do next?"

"Ugh!" said Susan, stamping her feet, "it's pretty cold. What about putting on some of these coats?"

"I am sure nobody would mind," said Susan; "it isn't as if we wanted to take them out of the house;
we shan't take them even out of the wardrobe."

They immediately carried out Susan's very sensible plan. The coats were rather too big for them so
that they came down to their heels and looked more like royal robes than coats when they had put
them on. But they all felt a good deal warmer and each thought the others looked better in their new
get-up and more suitable to the landscape.

"Where are we going anyway?" said Susan, chiefly for the sake of changing the subject.

"Is there anything written on it?" asked Susan.

"I don't know that I'm going to like this place after all," said Susan.

"I - I wonder if there's any point in going on," said Susan. "I mean, it doesn't seem particularly safe

"Shut up - you!" said Peter, who was still very angry with Edmund. "What do you think, Susan?"

"I've a horrid feeling that Lu is right," said Susan. "I don't want to go a step further and I wish we'd
never come. But I think we must try to do something for Mr Whatever-his-name is - I mean the
Faun."

"I've an idea he does," said Susan. "What do you think, Peter?"

"Sh! Look!" said Susan.

"There it goes again," said Susan presently.

"Let's go home," said Susan. And then, though nobody said it out loud, everyone suddenly realised
the same fact that Edmund had whispered to Peter at the end of the last chapter. They were lost.

"It's - it's a kind of animal," said Susan; and then, "Look! Look! Quick! There it is."

"It wants us to go to it," said Susan, "and it is warning us not to make a noise."

"Shan't we have to risk it?" said Susan. "I mean, it's no good just standing here and I feel I want
some dinner."

in its inside. Edmund felt a sensation of mysterious horror. Peter felt suddenly brave and adventurous.
Susan felt as if some delicious smell or some delightful strain of music had just floated by her. And
Lucy got the feeling you have when you wake up in the morning and realize that it is the beginning of
the holidays or the beginning of summer.

They were standing on the edge of a steep, narrow valley at the bottom of which ran - at least it
would have been running if it hadn't been frozen - a fairly large river. Just below them a dam had
been built across this river, and when they saw it everyone suddenly remembered that of course
beavers are always making dams and felt quite sure that Mr Beaver had made this one. They also
noticed that he now had a sort of modest expression on his, face - the sort of look people have when
you are visiting a garden they've made or reading a story they've written. So it was only common
politeness when Susan said, "What a lovely dam!" And Mr Beaver didn't say "Hush" this time but
"Merely a trifle! Merely a trifle! And it isn't really finished!"

Just as the frying-pan was nicely hissing Peter and Mr Beaver came in with the fish which Mr
Beaver had already opened with his knife and cleaned out in the open air. You can think how good
the new-caught fish smelled while they were frying and how the hungry children longed for them to
be done and how very much hungrier still they had become before Mr Beaver said, "Now we're
nearly ready." Susan drained the potatoes and then put them all back in the empty pot to dry on the
side of the range while Lucy was helping Mrs Beaver to dish up the trout, so that in a very few
minutes everyone was drawing up their stools (it was all three-legged stools in the Beavers' house
except for Mrs Beaver's own special rockingchair beside the fire) and preparing to enjoy themselves.
There was a jug of creamy milk for the children (Mr Beaver stuck to beer) and a great big lump of
deep yellow butter in the middle of the table from which everyone took as much as he wanted to go
with his potatoes, and all the children thought - and I agree with them - that there's nothing to beat
good freshwater fish if you eat it when it has been alive half an hour ago and has come out of the pan
half a minute ago. And when they had finished the fish Mrs Beaver brought unexpectedly out of the
oven a great and gloriously sticky marmalade roll, steaming hot, and at the same time moved the
kettle on to the fire, so that when they had finished the marmalade roll the tea was made and ready to
be poured out. And when each person had got his (or her) cup of tea, each person shoved back his (or
her) stool so as to be able to lean against the wall and gave a long sigh of contentment.

"No, we don't," said Susan. Mr Beaver shook his head in a very gloomy fashion.

"Who is Aslan?" asked Susan.

"But shall we see him?" asked Susan.

"Ooh!" said Susan, "I'd thought he was a man. Is he - quite safe? I shall feel rather nervous about
meeting a lion."

"How perfectly dreadful!" said Susan as they at last came back in despair. "Oh, how I wish we'd
never come."

"What do you mean?" said Susan. "He can't be far away yet. And we've got to find him. What do
you mean when you say there's no use looking for him?"

"Oh, surely-oh, really!" said Susan, "he can't have done that."

"What are you doing, Mrs Beaver?" exclaimed Susan.

"But we haven't time!" said Susan, buttoning the collar of her coat. "She may be here any minute."

"You've got to remember that, Mrs Beaver," said Susan. "As soon as she has looked in here and finds
we're gone she'll be off at top speed."

"Then - have we no hope?" said Susan.

The snow had stopped and the moon had come out when they began their journey. They went in
single file - first Mr Beaver, then Lucy, then Peter, then Susan, and Mrs Beaver last of all. Mr Beaver
led them across the dam and on to the right bank of the river and then along a very rough sort of path
among the trees right down by the river-bank. The sides of the valley, shining in the moonlight,
towered up far above them on either hand. "Best keep down here as much as possible," he said.
"She'll have to keep to the top, for you couldn't bring a sledge down here."

"Susan, Eve's Daughter," said Father Christmas. "These are for you," and he handed her a bow and a
quiver full of arrows and a little ivory horn. "You must use the bow only in great need," he said, "for
I do not mean you to fight in the battle. It does not easily miss. And when you put this horn to your
lips; and blow it, then, wherever you are, I think help of some kind will come to you."

They had been just as surprised as Edmund when they saw the winter vanishing and the whole wood
passing in a few hours or so from January to May. They hadn't even known for certain (as the Witch
did) that this was what would happen when Aslan came to Narnia. But they all knew that it was her
spells which had produced the endless winter; and therefore they all knew when this magic spring
began that something had gone wrong, and badly wrong, with the Witch's schemes. And after the
thaw had been going on for some time they all realised that the Witch would no longer be able to use
her sledge. After that they didn't hurry so much and they allowed themselves more rests and longer
ones. They were pretty tired by now of course; but not what I'd call bitterly tired - only slow and
feeling very dreamy and quiet inside as one does when one is coming to the end of a long day in the
open. Susan had a slight blister on one heel.

one could see in every direction - except right ahead. There, far to the East, was something twinkling
and moving. "By gum!" whispered Peter to Susan, "the sea!" In the very middle of this open hill-top
was the Stone Table. It was a great grim slab of grey stone supported on four upright stones. It looked
very old; and it was cut all over with strange lines and figures that might be the letters of an unknown
language. They gave you a curious feeling when you looked at them. The next thing they saw was a
pavilion pitched on one side of the open place. A wonderful pavilion it was - and especially now
when the light of the setting sun fell upon it - with sides of what looked like yellow silk and cords of
crimson and tent-pegs of ivory; and high above it on a pole a banner which bore a red rampant lion
fluttering in the breeze which was blowing in their faces from the far-off sea. While they were
looking at this they heard a sound of music on their right; and turning in that direction they saw what
they had come to see.

"Susan," whispered Peter, "What about you? Ladies first."

"No, you're the eldest," whispered Susan. And of course the longer they went on doing this the more
awkward they felt. Then at last Peter realised that it was up to him. He drew his sword and raised it to

"Welcome, Peter, Son of Adam," said Aslan. "Welcome, Susan and Lucy, Daughters of Eve.
Welcome He-Beaver and She-Beaver."

The Naiads and Dryads were scattering in every direction. Lucy was running towards him as fast as
her short legs would carry her and her face was as white as paper. Then he saw Susan make a dash
for a tree, and swing herself up, followed by a huge grey beast. At first Peter thought it was a bear.
Then he saw that it looked like an Alsatian, though it was far too big to be a dog. Then he realised
that it was a wolf - a wolf standing on its hind legs, with its front paws against the tree-trunk,
snapping and snarling. All the hair on its back stood up on end. Susan had not been able to get higher
than the second big branch. One of her legs hung down so that her foot was only an inch or two

Then, after a bit, Susan came down the tree. She and Peter felt pretty shaky when they met and I
won't say there wasn't kissing and crying on both sides. But in Narnia no one thinks any the worse of
you for that.

"Oh, Aslan!" whispered Susan in the Lion's ear, "can't we - I mean, you won't, will you? Can't we do
something about the Deep Magic? Isn't there something you can work against it?"

For the last part of the journey it was Susan and Lucy who saw most of him. He did not talk very
much and seemed to them to be sad.

This feeling affected Susan so much that she couldn't get to sleep when she went to bed. And after
she had lain counting sheep and turning over and over she heard Lucy give a long sigh and turn over
just beside her in the darkness.

"Can't you get to sleep either?" said Susan.

"No," said Lucy. "I thought you were asleep. I say, Susan!"

"There's been something wrong with him all afternoon," said Susan. "Lucy! What was that he said
about not being with us at the battle? You don't think he could be stealing away and leaving us
tonight, do you?"

"Susan! let's go outside and have a look round. We might see him."

"All right. Let's," said Susan; "we might just as well be doing that as lying awake here."

Very quietly the two girls groped their way among the other sleepers and crept out of the tent. The
moonlight was bright and everything was quite still except for the noise of the river chattering over
the stones. Then Susan suddenly caught Lucy's arm and said, "Look!" On the far side of the camping
ground, just where the trees began, they saw the Lion slowly walking away from them into the wood.
Without a word they both followed him.

"Please, may we come with you - wherever you're going?" asked Susan.

"Are you ill, dear Aslan?" asked Susan.

And both the girls cried bitterly (though they hardly knew why) and clung to the Lion and kissed his
mane and his nose and his paws and his great, sad eyes. Then he turned from them and walked out on
to the top of the hill. And Lucy and Susan, crouching in the bushes, looked after him, and this is what
they saw.

Lucy and Susan held their breaths waiting for Aslan's roar and his spring upon his enemies. But it
never came. Four Hags, grinning and leering, yet also (at first) hanging back and half afraid of what
they had to do, had approached him. "Bind him, I say!" repeated the White Witch. The Hags made a
dart at him and shrieked with triumph when they found that he made no resistance at all. Then others
- evil dwarfs and apes - rushed in to help them, and between them they rolled the huge Lion over on
his back and tied all his four paws together, shouting and cheering as if they had done something
brave, though, had the Lion chosen, one of those paws could have been the death of them all. But he
made no noise, even when the enemies, straining and tugging, pulled the cords so tight that they cut
into his flesh. Then they began to drag him towards the Stone Table.

"The cowards! The cowards!" sobbed Susan. "Are they still afraid of him, even now?"

As soon as the wood was silent again Susan and Lucy crept out onto the open hill-top. The moon
was getting low and thin clouds were passing across her, but still they could see the shape of the Lion
lying dead in his bonds. And down they both knelt in the wet grass and kissed his cold face and
stroked his beautiful fur - what was left of it - and cried till they could cry no more. And then they
looked at each other and held each other's hands for mere loneliness and cried again; and then again
were silent. At last Lucy said,

"I wonder could we untie him as well?" said Susan presently. But the enemies, out of pure
spitefulness, had drawn the cords so tight that the girls could make nothing of the knots.

I hope no one who reads this book has been quite as miserable as Susan and Lucy were that night;
but if you have been - if you've been up all night and cried till you have no more tears left in you you will know that there comes in the end a sort of quietness. You feel as if nothing was ever going
to happen again. At any rate that was how it felt to these two. Hours and hours seemed to go by in
this dead calm, and they hardly noticed that they were getting colder and colder. But at last Lucy
noticed two other things. One was that the sky on the east side of the hill was a little less dark than it
had been an hour ago. The other was some tiny movement going on in the grass at her feet. At first
she took no interest in this. What did it matter? Nothing mattered now! But at last she saw that
whatever-it-was had begun to move up the upright stones of the Stone Table. And now whateverthey-were were moving about on Aslan's body. She peered closer. They were little grey things.

"Ugh!" said Susan from the other side of the Table. "How beastly! There are horrid little mice
crawling over him. Go away, you little beasts." And she raised her hand to frighten them away.

"I do believe -" said Susan. "But how queer! They're nibbling away at the cords!"

"So am I," said Susan. "Let's walk about a bit."

"What's that?" said Lucy, clutching Susan's arm.

"I - I feel afraid to turn round," said Susan; "something awful is happening."

"They're doing something worse to Him," said Lucy. "Come on!" And she turned, pulling Susan
round with her.

"Who's done it?" cried Susan. "What does it mean? Is it magic?"

"You're not - not a - ?" asked Susan in a shaky voice. She couldn't bring herself to say the word
ghost. Aslan stooped his golden head and licked her forehead. The warmth of his breath and a rich
sort of smell that seemed to hang about his hair came all over her.

"But what does it all mean?" asked Susan when they were somewhat calmer.

"We have a long journey to go. You must ride on me." And he crouched down and the children
climbed on to his warm, golden back, and Susan sat first, holding on tightly to his mane and Lucy sat
behind holding on tightly to Susan. And with a great heave he rose underneath them and then shot
off, faster than any horse could go, down hill and into the thick of the forest.

"Hush," said Susan, "Aslan's doing something."

"Oh, Susan! Look! Look at the lion."

"Oh!" said Susan in a different tone. "Look! I wonder - I mean, is it safe?"

"That wasn't exactly what I meant," whispered Susan to Lucy. But it was too late to do anything
about it now even if Aslan would have listened to her. The change was already creeping up the

"Does he know," whispered Lucy to Susan, "what Aslan did for him? Does he know what the
arrangement with the Witch really was?"

"Hush! No. Of course not," said Susan.

"Oh, surely not," said Susan. "It would be too awful for him. Think how you'd feel if you were he."

That evening after tea the four children all managed to get down to the beach again and get their
shoes and stockings off and feel the sand between their toes. But next day was more solemn. For
then, in the Great Hall of Cair Paravel - that wonderful hall with the ivory roof and the west wall
hung with peacock's feathers and the eastern door which looks towards the sea, in the presence of all
their friends and to the sound of trumpets, Aslan solemnly crowned them and led them to the four
thrones amid deafening shouts of, "Long Live King Peter! Long Live Queen Susan! Long Live King
Edmund! Long Live Queen Lucy!"

And now, as you see, this story is nearly (but not quite) at an end. These two Kings and two Queens
governed Narnia well, and long and happy was their reign. At first much of their time was spent in
seeking out the remnants of the White Witch's army and destroying them, and indeed for a long time
there would be news of evil things lurking in the wilder parts of the forest - a haunting here and a
killing there, a glimpse of a werewolf one month and a rumour of a hag the next. But in the end all
that foul brood was stamped out. And they made good laws and kept the peace and saved good trees
from being unnecessarily cut down, and liberated young dwarfs and young satyrs from being sent to
school, and generally stopped busybodies and interferers and encouraged ordinary people who
wanted to live and let live. And they drove back the fierce giants (quite a different sort from Giant
Rumblebuffin) on the north of Narnia when these ventured across the frontier. And they entered into
friendship and alliance with countries beyond the sea and paid them visits of state and received visits
of state from them. And they themselves grew and changed as the years passed over them. And Peter
became a tall and deep-chested man and a great warrior, and he was called King Peter the
Magnificent. And Susan grew into a tall and gracious woman with black hair that fell almost to her
feet and the kings of the countries beyond the sea began to send ambassadors asking for her hand in
marriage. And she was called Susan the Gentle. Edmund was a graver and quieter man than Peter,
and great in council and judgement. He was called King Edmund the Just. But as for Lucy, she was
always gay and golden-haired, and all princes in those parts desired her to be their Queen, and her
own people called her Queen Lucy the Valiant.

So they alighted and tied their horses to trees and went on into the thick wood on foot. And as soon
as they had entered it Queen Susan said,

"And in mine too," said Queen Susan. "Wherefore by my counsel we shall lightly return to our
horses and follow this White Stag no further."

"Then in the name of Aslan," said Queen Susan, "if ye will all have it so, let us go on and take the
adventure that shall fall to us."

So these Kings and Queens entered the thicket, and before they had gone a score of paces they all
remembered that the thing they had seen was called a lamppost, and before they had gone twenty
more they noticed that they were. making their way not through branches but through coats. And next
moment they all came tumbling out of a wardrobe door into the empty room, and They were no
longer Kings and Queens in their hunting array but just Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy in their old
clothes. It was the same day and the same hour of the day on which they had all gone into the
wardrobe to hide. Mrs Macready and the visitors were still talking in the passage; but luckily they
never came into the empty room and so the children weren't caught.

