eyes at once. In that brief flash of a glance, his face held nothing of interest — it was as if she had called
his name, and he'd looked up in involuntary response, already having decided not to answer.
My neighbor giggled in embarrassment, looking at the table like I did.
"That's Edward and Emmett Cullen, and Rosalie and Jasper Hale. The one who left was Alice Cullen;
they all live together with Dr. Cullen and his wife." She said this under her breath.
I glanced sideways at the beautiful boy, who was looking at his tray now, picking a bagel to pieces with
long, pale fingers. His mouth was moving very quickly, his perfect lips barely opening. The other three still
looked away, and yet I felt he was speaking quietly to them.
Strange, unpopular names, I thought. The kinds of names grandparents had. But maybe that was in vogue
here — small town names? I finally remembered that my neighbor was called Jessica, a perfectly
common name. There were two girls named Jessica in my History class back home.
"They are… very nice-looking." I struggled with the conspicuous understatement.
"Yes!" Jessica agreed with another giggle. "They're all together though — Emmett and Rosalie, and
Jasper and Alice, I mean. And they live together." Her voice held all the shock and condemnation of the
small town, I thought critically. But, if I was being honest, I had to admit that even in Phoenix, it would
cause gossip.
"Which ones are the Cullens?" I asked. "They don't look related…"
"Oh, they're not. Dr. Cullen is really young, in his twenties or early thirties. They're all adopted. The
Hales are brother and sister, twins — the blondes — and they're foster children."
"They look a little old for foster children."
"They are now, Jasper and Rosalie are both eighteen, but they've been with Mrs. Cullen since they were
eight. She's their aunt or something like that."
"That's really kind of nice — for them to take care of all those kids like that, when they're so young and
everything."
"I guess so," Jessica admitted reluctantly, and I got the impression that she didn't like the doctor and his
wife for some reason. With the glances she was throwing at their adopted children, I would presume the
reason was jealousy. "I think that Mrs. Cullen can't have any kids, though," she added, as if that lessened
their kindness.
Throughout all this conversation, my eyes flickered again and again to the table where the strange family
sat. They continued to look at the walls and not eat.
"Have they always lived in Forks?" I asked. Surely I would have noticed them on one of my summers
here.
"No," she said in a voice that implied it should be obvious, even to a new arrival like me. "They just
moved down two years ago from somewhere in Alaska."
I felt a surge of pity, and relief. Pity because, as beautiful as they were, they were outsiders, clearly not
accepted. Relief that I wasn't the only newcomer here, and certainly not the most interesting by any
standard.

turned to see where it came from. I had my suspicions about Eric, who was walking away, his back
toward us — in the wrong direction for his next class. Mike appatently had the same notion. He bent
over and began scraping together a pile of the white mush.
"I'll see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. "Once people start throwing wet stuff, I go
inside."
He just nodded, his eyes on Eric's retreating figure.
Throughout the morning, everyone chattered excitedly about the snow; apparently it was the first snowfall
of the new year. I kept my mouth shut. Sure, it was drier than rain — until it melted in your socks.
I walked alertly to the cafeteria with Jessica after Spanish. Mush balls were flying everywhere. I kept a
binder in my hands, ready to use it as a shield if necessary. Jessica thought I was hilarious, but something
in my expression kept her from lobbing a snowball at me herself.
Mike caught up to us as we walked in the doors, laughing, with ice melting the spikes in his hair. He and
Jessica were talking animatedly about the snow fight as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that
table in the corner out of habit. And then I froze where I stood. There were five people at the table.
Jessica pulled on my arm.
"Hello? Bella? What do you want?"
I looked down; my ears were hot. I had no reason to feel self-conscious, I reminded myself. I hadn't
done anything wrong.
"What's with Bella?" Mike asked Jessica.
"Nothing," I answered. "I'll just get a soda today." I caught up to the end of the line.
"Aren't you hungry?" Jessica asked.
"Actually, I feel a little sick," I said, my eyes still on the floor.
I waited for them to get their food, and then followed them to a table, my eyes on my feet.
I sipped my soda slowly, my stomach churning. Twice Mike asked, with unnecessary concern, how I
was feeling.
I told him it was nothing, but I was wondering if I should play it up and escape to the nurse's office for
the next hour.
Ridiculous. I shouldn't have to run away.
I decided to permit myself one glance at the Cullen family's table. If he was glaring at me, I would skip
Biology, like the coward I was.
I kept my head down and glanced up under my lashes. None of them were looking this way. I lifted my
head a little.
They were laughing. Edward, Jasper, and Emmett all had their hair entirely saturated with melting snow.
Alice and Rosalie were leaning away as Emmett shook his dripping hair toward them. They were
enjoying the snowy day, just like everyone else — only they looked more like a scene from a movie than
the rest of us.

acknowledge him.
While I was sitting there, looking everywhere but at the car in front of me, I heard a knock on my
passenger side window. I looked over; it was Tyler. I glanced back in my rearview mirror, confused. His
car was still running, the door left open. I leaned across the cab to crank the window down. It was stiff. I
got it halfway down, then gave up.
"I'm sorry, Tyler, I'm stuck behind Cullen." I was annoyed — obviously the holdup wasn't my fault.
"Oh, I know — I just wanted to ask you something while we're trapped here." He grinned.
This could not be happening.
"Will you ask me to the spring dance?" he continued.
"I'm not going to be in town, Tyler." My voice sounded a little sharp. I had to remember it wasn't his fault
that Mike and Eric had already used up my quota of patience for the day.
"Yeah, Mike said that," he admitted.
"Then why —"
He shrugged. "I was hoping you were just letting him down easy."
Okay, it was completely his fault.
"Sorry, Tyler," I said, working to hide my irritation. "I really am going out of town."
"That's cool. We still have prom."
And before I could respond, he was walking back to his car. I could feel the shock on my face. I looked
forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper all sliding into the Volvo. In his rearview mirror,
Edward's eyes were on me. He was unquestionably shaking with laughter, as if he'd heard every word
Tyler had said. My foot itched toward the gas pedal… one little bump wouldn't hurt any of them, just that
glossy silver paint job. I revved the engine.
But they were all in, and Edward was speeding away. I drove home slowly, carefully, muttering to myself
the whole way.
When I got home, I decided to make chicken enchiladas for dinner. It was a long process, and it would
keep me busy. While I was simmering the onions and chilies, the phone rang. I was almost afraid to
answer it, but it might be Charlie or my mom.
It was Jessica, and she was jubilant; Mike had caught her after school to accept her invitation. I
celebrated with her briefly while I stirred. She had to go, she wanted to call Angela and Lauren to tell
them. I suggested — with casual innocence — that maybe Angela, the shy girl who had Biology with me,
could ask Eric. And Lauren, a standoffish girl who had always ignored me at the lunch table, could ask
Tyler; I'd heard he was still available. Jess thought that was a great idea. Now that she was sure of Mike,
she actually sounded sincere when she said she wished I would go to the dance. I gave her my Seattle
excuse.
After I hung up, I tried to concentrate on dinner — dicing the chicken especially; I didn't want to take
another trip to the emergency room. But my head was spinning, trying to analyze every word Edward
had spoken today. What did he mean, it was better if we weren't friends?

I was confused. "I'm going home."
"Didn't you hear me promise to take you safely home? Do you think I'm going to let you drive in your
condition?" His voice was still indignant.
"What condition? And what about my truck?" I complained.
"I'll have Alice drop it off after school." He was towing me toward his car now, pulling me by my jacket.
It was all I could do to keep from falling backward. He'd probably just drag me along anyway if I did.
"Let go!" I insisted. He ignored me. I staggered along sideways across the wet sidewalk until we reached
the Volvo. Then he finally freed me — I stumbled against the passenger door.
"You are so pushy!" I grumbled.
"It's open," was all he responded. He got in the driver's side.
"I am perfectly capable of driving myself home!" I stood by the car, fuming. It was raining harder now,
and I'd never put my hood up, so my hair was dripping down my back.
He lowered the automatic window and leaned toward me across the seat. "Get in, Bella."
I didn't answer. I was mentally calculating my chances of reaching the truck before he could catch me. I
had to admit, they weren't good.
"I'll just drag you back," he threatened, guessing my plan.
I tried to maintain what dignity I could as I got into his car. I wasn't very successful — I looked like a
half-drowned cat and my boots squeaked.
"This is completely unnecessary," I said stiffly.
He didn't answer. He fiddled with the controls, turning the heater up and the music down. As he pulled
out of the parking lot, I was preparing to give him the silent treatment — my face in full pout mode — but
then I recognized the music playing, and my curiosity got the better of my intentions.
"Clair de Lune?" I asked, surprised.
"You know Debussy?" He sounded surprised, too.
"Not well," I admitted. "My mother plays a lot of classical music around the house — I only know my
favorites."
"It's one of my favorites, too." He stared out through the rain, lost in thought.
I listened to the music, relaxing against the light gray leather seat. It was impossible not to respond to the
familiar, soothing melody. The rain blurred everything outside the window into gray and green smudges. I
began to realize we were driving very fast; the car moved so steadily, so evenly, though, I didn't feel the
speed. Only the town flashing by gave it away.
"What is your mother like?" he asked me suddenly.
I glanced over to see him studying me with curious eyes.
"She looks a lot like me, but she's prettier," I said. He raised his eyebrows. "I have too much Charlie in

As I sat in my room, trying to concentrate on the third act of Macbeth, I was really listening for my truck.
I would have thought, even over the pounding rain, I could have heard the engine's roar. But when I went
to peek out the curtain — again — it was suddenly there.
I wasn't looking forward to Friday, and it more than lived up to my non-expectations. Of course there
were the fainting comments. Jessica especially seemed to get a kick out of that story. Luckily Mike had
kept his mouth shut, and no one seemed to know about Edward's involvement. She did have a lot of
questions about lunch, though.
"So what did Edward Cullen want yesterday?" Jessica asked in Trig.
"I don't know," I answered truthfully. "He never really got to the point."
"You looked kind of mad," she fished.
"Did I?" I kept my expression blank.
"You know, I've never seen him sit with anyone but his family before. That was weird."
"Weird," I agreed. She seemed annoyed; she flipped her dark curls impatiently — I guessed she'd been
hoping to hear something that would make a good story for her to pass on.
The worst part about Friday was that, even though I knew he wasn't going to be there, I still hoped.
When I walked into the cafeteria with Jessica and Mike, I couldn't keep from looking at his table, where
Rosalie, Alice, and Jasper sat talking, heads close together. And I couldn't stop the gloom that engulfed
me as I realized I didn't know how long I would have to wait before I saw him again.
At my usual table, everyone was full of our plans for the next day. Mike was animated again, putting a
great deal of trust in the local weatherman who promised sun tomorrow. I'd have to see that before I
believed it. But it was warmer today — almost sixty. Maybe the outing wouldn't be completely
miserable.

As long as the "we" part was in, I didn't care about anything else.
"I'm open to alternatives," I allowed. "But I do have a favor to ask."
He looked wary, as he always did when I asked an open-ended question. "What?"
"Can I drive?"
He frowned. "Why?"
"Well, mostly because when I told Charlie I was going to Seattle, he specifically asked if I was going
alone and, at the time, I was. If he asked again, I probably wouldn't lie, but I don't think he will ask
again, and leaving my truck at home would just bring up the subject unnecessarily. And also, because
your driving frightens me."
He rolled his eyes. "Of all the things about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He
shook his head in disgust, but then his eyes were serious again. "Won't you want to tell your father that
you're spending the day with me?" There was an undercurrent to his question that I didn't understand.
"With Charlie, less is always more." I was definite about that. "Where are we going, anyway?"
"The weather will be nice, so I'll be staying out of the public eye… and you can stay with me, if you'd like
to." Again, he was leaving the choice up to me.
"And you'll show me what you meant, about the sun?" I asked, excited by the idea of unraveling another
of the unknowns.
"Yes." He smiled, and then paused. "But if you don't want to be… alone with me, I'd still rather you
didn't go to Seattle by yourself. I shudder to think of the trouble you could find in a city that size."
I was miffed. "Phoenix is three times bigger than Seattle — just in population. In physical size —"
"But apparently," he interrupted me, "your number wasn't up in Phoenix. So I'd rather you stayed near
me." His eyes did that unfair smoldering thing again.
I couldn't argue, with the eyes or the motivation, and it was a moot point anyway. "As it happens, I don't
mind being alone with you."
"I know," he sighed, brooding. "You should tell Charlie, though."
"Why in the world would I do that?"
His eyes were suddenly fierce. "To give me some small incentive to bring you back."
I gulped. But, after a moment of thought, I was sure. "I think I'll take my chances."
He exhaled angrily, and looked away.
"Let's talk about something else," I suggested.
"What do you want to talk about?" he asked. He was still annoyed.
I glanced around us, making sure we were well out of anyone's hearing. As I cast my eyes around the
room, I caught the eyes of his sister, Alice, staring at me. The others were looking at Edward. I looked
away swiftly, back to him, and I. asked the first thing that came to mind.

"I should have let you drive yourself today," he announced, apropos of nothing, while I chewed.
"Why?" I demanded.
"I'm leaving with Alice after lunch."
"Oh." I blinked, bewildered and disappointed. "That's okay, it's not that far of a walk."
He frowned at me impatiently. "I'm not going to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave
it here for you."
"I don't have my key with me," I sighed. "I really don't mind walking." What I minded was losing my time
with him.
He shook his head. "Your truck will be here, and the key will be in the ignition — unless you're afraid
someone might steal it." He laughed at the thought.
"All right," I agreed, pursing my lips. I was pretty sure my key was in the pocket of a pair of jeans I wore
Wednesday, under a pile of clothes in the laundry room. Even if he broke into my house, or whatever he
was planning, he'd never find it. He seemed to feel the challenge in my consent. He smirked,
overconfident.
"So where are you going?" I asked as casually as I could manage.
"Hunting," he answered grimly. "If I'm going to be alone with you tomorrow, I'm going to take whatever
precautions I can." His face grew morose… and pleading. "You can always cancel, you know."
I looked down, afraid of the persuasive power of his eyes. I refused to be convinced to fear him, no
matter how real the danger might be. It doesn't matter, I repeated in my head.
"No," I whispered, glancing back at his face. "I can't."
"Perhaps you're right," he murmured bleakly. His eyes seemed to darken in color as I watched.
I changed the subject. "What time will I see you tomorrow?" I asked, already depressed by the thought
of him leaving now.
"That depends… it's a Saturday, don't you want to sleep in?" he offered.
"No," I answered too fast. He restrained a smile.
"The same time as usual, then," he decided. "Will Charlie be there?"
"No, he's fishing tomorrow." I beamed at the memory of how conveniently things had worked out.
His voice turned sharp. "And if you don't come home, what will he think?"
"I have no idea," I answered coolly. "He knows I've been meaning to do the laundry. Maybe he'll think I
fell in the washer."
He scowled at me and I scowled back. His anger was much more impressive than mine.
"What are you hunting tonight?" I asked when I was sure I had lost the glowering contest.
"Whatever we find in the park. We aren't going far." He seemed bemused by my casual reference to his
secret realities.

"Why are you going with Alice?" I wondered.
"Alice is the most… supportive." He frowned as he spoke.
"And the others?" I asked timidly. "What are they?"
His brow puckered for a brief moment. "Incredulous, for the most part."
I peeked quickly behind me at his family. They sat staring off in different directions, exactly the same as
the first time I'd seen them. Only now they were four; their beautiful, bronze-haired brother sat across
from me, his golden eyes troubled.
"They don't like me," I guessed.
"That's not it," he disagreed, but his eyes were too innocent. "They don't understand why I can't leave
you alone."
I grimaced. "Neither do I, for that matter."
Edward shook his head slowly, rolling his eyes toward the ceiling before he met my gaze again. "I told
you — you don't see yourself clearly at all. You're not like anyone I've ever known. You fascinate me."
I glared at him, sure he was teasing now.
He smiled as he deciphered my expression. "Having the advantages I do," he murmured, touching his
forehead discreetly, "I have a better than average grasp of human nature. People are predictable. But
you… you never do what I expect. You always take me by surprise."
I looked away, my eyes wandering back to his family, embarrassed and dissatisfied. His words made me
feel like a science experiment. I wanted to laugh at myself for expecting anything else.
"That part is easy enough to explain," he continued. I felt his eyes on my face but I couldn't look at him
yet, afraid he might read the chagrin in my eyes. "But there's more… and it's not so easy to put into
words —"
I was still staring at the Cullens while he spoke. Suddenly Rosalie, his blond and breathtaking sister,
turned to look at me. No, not to look — to glare, with dark, cold eyes. I wanted to look away, but her
gaze held me until Edward broke off mid-sentence and made an angry noise under his breath. It was
almost a hiss.
Rosalie turned her head, and I was relieved to be free. I looked back at Edward — and I knew he could
see the confusion and fear that widened my eyes.
His face was tight as he explained. "I'm sorry about that. She's just worried. You see… it's dangerous for
more than just me if, after spending so much time with you so publicly…" He looked down.
"If?"
"If this ends… badly." He dropped his head into his hands, as he had that night in Port Angeles. His
anguish was plain; I yearned to comfort him, but I was at a loss to know how. My hand reached toward
him involuntarily; quickly, though, I dropped it to the table, fearing that my touch would only make things
worse. I realized slowly that his words should frighten me. I waited for that fear to come, but all I could
seem to feel was an ache for his pain.
And frustration — frustration that Rosalie had interrupted whatever he was about to say. I didn't know

how to bring it up again. He still had his head in his hands.
I tried to speak in a normal voice. "And you have to leave now?"
"Yes." He raised his face; it was serious for a moment, and then his mood shifted and he smiled. "It's
probably for the best. We still have fifteen minutes of that wretched movie left to endure in Biology — I
don't think I could take any more."
I started. Alice — her short, inky hair in a halo of spiky disarray around her exquisite, elfin face — was
suddenly standing behind his shoulder. Her slight frame was willowy, graceful even in absolute stillness.
He greeted her without looking away from me. "Alice."
"Edward," she answered, her high soprano voice almost as attractive as his.
"Alice, Bella — Bella, Alice," he introduced us, gesturing casually with his hand, a wry smile on his face.
"Hello, Bella." Her brilliant obsidian eyes were unreadable, but her smile was friendly. "It's nice to finally
meet you."
Edward flashed a dark look at her.
"Hi, Alice," I murmured shyly.
"Are you ready?" she asked him.
His voice was aloof. "Nearly. I'll meet you at the car."
She left without another word; her walk was so fluid, so sinuous that I felt a sharp pang of jealousy.
"Should I say 'have fun," or is that the wrong sentiment?" I asked, turning back to him.
"No, 'have fun' works as well as anything." He grinned.
"Have fun, then." I worked to sound wholehearted. Of course I didn't fool him.
"I'll try." He still grinned. "And you try to be safe, please."
"Safe in Forks — what a challenge."
"For you it is a challenge." His jaw hardened. "Promise."
"I promise to try to be safe," I recited. "I'll do the laundry tonight — that ought to be fraught with peril."
"Don't fall in," he mocked.
"I'll do my best."
He stood then, and I rose, too.
"I'll see you tomorrow," I sighed.
"It seems like a long time to you, doesn't it?" he mused.
I nodded glumly.
"I'll be there in the morning," he promised, smiling his crooked smile. He reached across the table to

We were soon out of the town limits, despite his negativity. Thick underbrush and green-swathed trunks
replaced the lawns and houses.
"Turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as I was about to ask. I obeyed silently.
"Now we drive until the pavement ends."
I could hear a smile in his voice, but I was too afraid of driving off the road and proving him right to look
over and be sure.
"And what's there, at the pavement's end?" I wondered.
"A trail."
"We're hiking?" Thank goodness I'd worn tennis shoes.
"Is that a problem?" He sounded as if he'd expected as much.
"No." I tried to make the lie sound confident. But if he thought my truck was slow…
"Don't worry, it's only five miles or so, and we're in no hurry."
Five miles. I didn't answer, so that he wouldn't hear my voice crack in panic. Five miles of treacherous
roots and loose stones, trying to twist my ankles or otherwise incapacitate me. This was going to be
humiliating.
We drove in silence for a while as I contemplated the coming horror.
"What are you thinking?" he asked impatiently after a few moments.
I lied again. "Just wondering where we're going."
"It's a place I like to go when the weather is nice." We both glanced out the windows at the thinning
clouds after he spoke.
"Charlie said it would be warm today."
"And did you tell Charlie what you were up to?" he asked.
"Nope."
"But Jessica thinks we're going to Seattle together?" He seemed cheered by the idea.
"No, I told her you canceled on me — which is true."
"No one knows you're with me?" Angrily, now.
"That depends… I assume you told Alice?"
"That's very helpful, Bella," he snapped.
I pretended I didn't hear that.
"Are you so depressed by Forks that it's made you suicidal?" he demanded when I ignored him.
"You said it might cause trouble for you… us being together publicly," I reminded him.

"It was unquestionably a complication that I couldn't simply read your thoughts to know what your
reaction was to me. I wasn't used to having to go to such circuitous measures, listening to your words in
Jessica's mind… her mind isn't very original, and it was annoying to have to stoop to that. And then I
couldn't know if you really meant what you said. It was all extremely irritating." He frowned at the
memory.
"I wanted you to forget my behavior that first day, if possible, so I tried to talk with you like I would with
any person. I was eager actually, hoping to decipher some of your thoughts. But you were too interesting,
I found myself caught up in your expressions… and every now and then you would stir the air with your
hand or your hair, and the scent would stun me again…
"Of course, then you were nearly crushed to death in front of my eyes. Later I thought of a perfectly
good excuse for why I acted at that moment — because if I hadn't saved you, if your blood had been
spilled there in front of me, I don't think I could have stopped myself from exposing us for what we are.
But I only thought of that excuse later. At the time, all I could think was, "Not her.'"
He closed his eyes, lost in his agonized confession. I listened, more eager than rational. Common sense
told me I should be terrified. Instead, I was relieved to finally understand. And I was filled with
compassion for his suffering, even now, as he confessed his craving to take my life.
I finally was able to speak, though my voice was faint. "In the hospital?"
His eyes flashed up to mine. "I was appalled. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself
in your power — you of all people. As if I needed another motive to kill you." We both flinched as that
word slipped out. "But it had the opposite effect," he continued quickly. "I fought with Rosalie, Emmett,
and Jasper when they suggested that now was the time… the worst fight we've ever had. Carlisle sided
with me, and Alice." He grimaced when he said her name. I couldn't imagine why. "Esme told me to do
whatever I had to in order to stay." He shook his head indulgently.
"All that next day I eavesdropped on the minds of everyone you spoke to, shocked that you kept your
word. I didn't understand you at all. But I knew that I couldn't become more involved with you. I did my
very best to stay as far from you as possible. And every day the perfume of your skin, your breath, your
hair… it hit me as hard as the very first day."
He met my eyes again, and they were surprisingly tender.
"And for all that," he continued, "I'd have fared better if I had exposed us all at that first moment, than if
now, here — with no witnesses and nothing to stop me — I were to hurt you."
I was human enough to have to ask. "Why?"
"Isabella." He pronounced my full name carefully, then playfully ruffled my hair with his free hand. A
shock ran through my body at his casual touch. "Bella, I couldn't live with myself if I ever hurt you. You
don't know how it's tortured me." He looked down, ashamed again. "The thought of you, still, white,
cold… to never see you blush scarlet again, to never see that flash of intuition in your eyes when you see
through my pretenses… it would be unendurable." He lifted his glorious, agonized eyes to mine. "You are
the most important thing to me now. The most important thing to me ever."
My head was spinning at the rapid change in direction our conversation had taken. From the cheerful
topic of my impending demise, we were suddenly declaring ourselves. He waited, and even though I
looked down to study our hands between us, I knew his golden eyes were on me. "You already know
how I feel, of course," I finally said. "I'm here… which, roughly translated, means I would rather die than
stay away from you." I frowned. "I'm an idiot."

"Yes," he murmured. "She saw something in his face that made her strong enough. And they've been
together ever since. Sometimes they live separately from us, as a married couple. But the younger we
pretend to be, the longer we can stay in any given place. Forks seemed perfect, so we all enrolled in high
school." He laughed. "I suppose we'll have to go to their wedding in a few years, again."
"Alice and Jasper?"
"Alice and Jasper are two very rare creatures. They both developed a conscience, as we refer to it, with
no outside guidance. Jasper belonged to another… family, a very different kind of family. He became
depressed, and he wandered on his own. Alice found him. Like me, she has certain gifts above and
beyond the norm for our kind."
"Really?" I interrupted, fascinated. "But you said you were the only one who could hear people's
thoughts."
"That's true. She knows other things. She sees things — things that might happen, things that are coming.
But it's very subjective. The future isn't set in stone. Things change."
His jaw set when he said that, and his eyes darted to my face and away so quickly that I wasn't sure if I
only imagined it.
"What kinds of things does she see?"
"She saw Jasper and knew that he was looking for her before he knew it himself. She saw Carlisle and
our family, and they came together to find us. She's most sensitive to non-humans. She always sees, for
example, when another group of our kind is coming near. And any threat they may pose."
"Are there a lot of… your kind?" I was surprised. How many of them could walk among us undetected?
"No, not many. But most won't settle in any one place. Only those like us, who've given up hunting you
people" — a sly glance in my direction — "can live together with humans for any length of time. We've
only found one other family like ours, in a small village in Alaska. We lived together for a time, but there
were so many of us that we became too noticeable. Those of us who live… differently tend to band
together."
"And the others?"
"Nomads, for the most part. We've all lived that way at times. It gets tedious, like anything else. But we
run across the others now and then, because most of us prefer the North."
"Why is that?"
We were parked in front of my house now, and he'd turned off the truck. It was very quiet and dark;
there was no moon. The porch light was off so I knew my father wasn't home yet.
"Did you have your eyes open this afternoon?" he teased. "Do you think I could walk down the street in
the sunlight without causing traffic accidents? There's a reason why we chose the Olympic Peninsula, one
of the most sunless places in the world. It's nice to be able to go outside in the day. You wouldn't believe
how tired you can get of nighttime in eighty-odd years."
"So that's where the legends came from?"
"Probably."

"And Alice came from another family, like Jasper?"
"No, and that is a mystery. Alice doesn't remember her human life at all. And she doesn't know who
created her. She awoke alone. Whoever made her walked away, and none of us understand why, or
how, he could. If she hadn't had that other sense, if she hadn't seen Jasper and Carlisle and known that
she would someday become one of us, she probably would have turned into a total savage."
There was so much to think through, so much I still wanted to ask. But, to my great embarrassment, my
stomach growled. I'd been so intrigued, I hadn't even noticed I was hungry. I realized now that I was
ravenous.
"I'm sorry, I'm keeping you from dinner."
"I'm fine, really."
"I've never spent much time around anyone who eats food. I forget."
"I want to stay with you." It was easier to say in the darkness, knowing as I spoke how my voice would
betray me, my hopeless addiction to him.
"Can't I come in?" he asked.
"Would you like to?" I couldn't picture it, this godlike creature sitting in my father's shabby kitchen chair.
"Yes, if it's all right." I heard the door close quietly, and almost simultaneously he was outside my door,
opening it for me.
"Very human," I complimented him.
"It's definitely resurfacing."
He walked beside me in the night, so quietly I had to peek at him constantly to be sure he was still there.
In the darkness he looked much more normal. Still pale, still dreamlike in his beauty, but no longer the
fantastic sparkling creature of our sunlit afternoon.
He reached the door ahead of me and opened it for me. I paused halfway through the frame.
"The door was unlocked?"
"No, I used the key from under the eave."
I stepped inside, flicked on the porch light, and turned to look at him with my eyebrows raised. I was
sure I'd never used that key in front of him.
"I was curious about you."
"You spied on me?" But somehow I couldn't infuse my voice with the proper outrage. I was flattered.
He was unrepentant. "What else is there to do at night?"
I let it go for the moment and went down the hall to the kitchen. He was there before me, needing no
guide. He sat in the very chair I'd tried to picture him in. His beauty lit up the kitchen. It was a moment
before I could look away.
I concentrated on getting my dinner, taking last night's lasagna from the fridge, placing a square on a

He hesitated before answering. "That's a good question, and you are not the first one to ask it. The others
— the majority of our kind who are quite content with our lot — they, too, wonder at how we live. But
you see, just because we've been… dealt a certain hand… it doesn't mean that we can't choose to rise
above — to conquer the boundaries of a destiny that none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever
essential humanity we can."
I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence.
"Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few minutes.
"No."
"Is that all you were curious about?"
I rolled my eyes. "Not quite."
"What else do you want to know?"
"Why can you read minds — why only you? And Alice, seeing the future… why does that happen?"
I felt him shrug in the darkness. "We don't really know. Carlisle has a theory… he believes that we all
bring something of our strongest human traits with us into the next life, where they are intensified — like
our minds, and our senses. He thinks that I must have already been very sensitive to the thoughts of those
around me. And that Alice had some precognition, wherever she was."
"What did he bring into the next life, and the others?"
"Carlisle brought his compassion. Esme brought her ability to love passionately. Emmett brought his
strength, Rosalie her… tenacity. Or you could call it pigheadedness." he chuckled. "Jasper is very
interesting. He was quite charismatic in his first life, able to influence those around him to see things his
way. Now he is able to manipulate the emotions of those around him — calm down a room of angry
people, for example, or excite a lethargic crowd, conversely. It's a very subtle gift."
I considered the impossibilities he described, trying to take it in. He waited patiently while I thought.
"So where did it all start? I mean, Carlisle changed you, and then someone must have changed him, and
so on…"
"Well, where did you come from? Evolution? Creation? Couldn't we have evolved in the same way as
other species, predator and prey? Or, if you don't believe that all this world could have just happened on
its own, which is hard for me to accept myself, is it so hard to believe that the same force that created the
delicate angelfish with the shark, the baby seal and the killer whale, could create both our kinds
together?"
"Let me get this straight — I'm the baby seal, right?"
"Right." He laughed, and something touched my hair — his lips?
I wanted to turn toward him, to see if it was really his lips against my hair. But I had to be good; I didn't
want to make this any harder for him than it already was.
"Are you ready to sleep?" he asked, interrupting the short silence. "Or do you have any more questions?"
"Only a million or two."

"Are you afraid now?" He sounded hopeful.
"Yes," I admitted; how could I deny it — he could see my eyes.
"Don't worry." He smirked. "I'll protect you."
"I'm not afraid of them," I explained. "I'm afraid they won't… like me. Won't they be, well, surprised that
you would bring someone… like me… home to meet them? Do they know that I know about them?"
"Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his voice
was harsh — "on whether I'd bring you back, though why anyone would bet against Alice, I can't
imagine. At any rate, we don't have secrets in the family. It's not really feasible, what with my mind
reading and Alice seeing the future and all that."
"And Jasper making you feel all warm and fuzzy about spilling your guts, don't forget that."
"You paid attention," he smiled approvingly.
"I've been known to do that every now and then." I grimaced. "So did Alice see me coming?"
His reaction was strange. "Something like that," he said uncomfortably, turning away so I couldn't see his
eyes. I stared at him curiously.
"Is that any good?" he asked, turning back to me abruptly and eyeing my breakfast with a teasing look on
his face. "Honestly, it doesn't look very appetizing."
"Well, it's no irritable grizzly…" I murmured, ignoring him when he glowered. I was still wondering why
he responded that way when I mentioned Alice. I hurried through my cereal, speculating.
He stood in the middle of the kitchen, the statue of Adonis again, staring abstractedly out the back
windows.
Then his eyes were back on me, and he smiled his heartbreaking smile.
"And you should introduce me to your father, too, I think."
"He already knows you," I reminded him.
"As your boyfriend, I mean."
I stared at him with suspicion. "Why?"
"Isn't that customary?" he asked innocently.
"I don't know," I admitted. My dating history gave me few reference points to work with. Not that any
normal rules of dating applied here. "That's not necessary, you know. I don't expect you to… I mean,
you don't have to pretend for me."
His smile was patient. "I'm not pretending."
I pushed the remains of my cereal around the edges of the bowl, biting my lip.
"Are you going to tell Charlie I'm your boyfriend or not?" he demanded.
"Is that what you are?" I suppressed my internal cringing at the thought of Edward and Charlie and the
word boy friend all in the same room at the same time.

"Where are Alice and Jasper?" Edward asked, but no one answered, as they had just appeared at the
top of the wide staircase.
"Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the stairs, a streak of black hair and white
skin, coming to a sudden and graceful stop in front of me. Carlisle and Esme shot warning glances at her,
but I liked it. It was natural — for her, anyway.
"Hi, Bella!" Alice said, and she bounced forward to kiss my cheek. If Carlisle and Esme had looked
cautious before, they now looked staggered. There was shock in my eyes, too, but I was also very
pleased that she seemed to approve of me so entirely. I was startled to feel Edward stiffen at my side. I
glanced at his face, but his expression was unreadable.
"You do smell nice, I never noticed before," she commented, to my extreme embarrassment.
No one else seemed to know quite what to say, and then Jasper was there — tall and leonine. A feeling
of ease spread through me, and I was suddenly comfortable despite where I was. Edward stared at
Jasper, raising one eyebrow, and I remembered what Jasper could do.
"Hello, Bella," Jasper said. He kept his distance, not offering to shake my hand. But it was impossible to
feel awkward near him.
"Hello, Jasper." I smiled at him shyly, and then at the others. "It's nice to meet you all — you have a very
beautiful home," I added conventionally.
"Thank you," Esme said. "We're so glad that you came." She spoke with feeling, and I realized that she
thought I was brave.
I also realized that Rosalie and Emmett were nowhere to be seen, and I remembered Edward's
too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if the others didn't like me.
Carlisle's expression distracted me from this train of thought; he was gazing meaningfully at Edward with
an intense expression. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Edward nod once.
I looked away, trying to be polite. My eyes wandered again to the beautiful instrument on the platform by
the door. I suddenly remembered my childhood fantasy that, should I ever win a lottery, I would buy a
grand piano for my mother. She wasn't really good — she only played for herself on our secondhand
upright — but I loved to watch her play. She was happy, absorbed — she seemed like a new,
mysterious being to me then, someone outside the "mom" persona I took for granted. She'd put me
through lessons, of course, but like most kids, I whined until she let me quit.
Esme noticed my preoccupation.
"Do you play?" she asked, inclining her head toward the piano.
I shook my head. "Not at all. But it's so beautiful. Is it yours?"
"No," she laughed. "Edward didn't tell you he was musical?"
"No." I glared at his suddenly innocent expression with narrowed eyes. "I should have known, I guess."
Esme raised her delicate eyebrows in confusion.
"Edward can do everything, right?" I explained.
Jasper snickered and Esme gave Edward a reproving look.

I pursed my lips skeptically. "Emmett?"
"Well, he thinks I'm a lunatic, it's true, but he doesn't have a problem with you. He's trying to reason with
Rosalie."
"What is it that upsets her?" I wasn't sure if I wanted to know the answer.
He sighed deeply. "Rosalie struggles the most with… with what we are. It's hard for her to have someone
on the outside know the truth. And she's a little jealous."
"Rosalie is jealous of me?" I asked incredulously. I tried to imagine a universe in which someone as
breathtaking as Rosalie would have any possible reason to feel jealous of someone like me.
"You're human." He shrugged. "She wishes that she were, too."
"Oh," I muttered, still stunned. "Even Jasper, though…"
"That's really my fault," he said. "I told you he was the most recent to try our way of life. I warned him to
keep his distance."
I thought about the reason for that, and shuddered.
"Esme and Carlisle… ?" I continued quickly, to keep him from noticing.
"Are happy to see me happy. Actually, Esme wouldn't care if you had a third eye and webbed feet. All
this time she's been worried about me, afraid that there was something missing from my essential makeup,
that I was too young when Carlisle changed me… She's ecstatic. Every time I touch you, she just about
chokes with satisfaction."
"Alice seems very… enthusiastic."
"Alice has her own way of looking at things," he said through tight lips.
"And you're not going to explain that, are you?"
A moment of wordless communication passed between us. He realized that I knew he was keeping
something from me. I realized that he wasn't going to give anything away. Not now.
"So what was Carlisle telling you before?"
His eyebrows pulled together. "You noticed that, did you?"
I shrugged. "Of course."
He looked at me thoughtfully for a few seconds before answering. "He wanted to tell me some news —
he didn't know if it was something I would share with you."
"Will you?"
"I have to, because I'm going to be a little… overbearingly protective over the next few days — or
weeks — and I wouldn't want you to think I'm naturally a tyrant."
"What's wrong?"
"Nothing's wrong, exactly. Alice just sees some visitors coming soon. They know we're here, and they're
curious."

"Visitors?"
"Yes… well, they aren't like us, of course — in their hunting habits, I mean. They probably won't come
into town at all, but I'm certainly not going to let you out of my sight till they're gone."
I shivered.
"Finally, a rational response!" he murmured. "I was beginning to think you had no sense of
self-preservation at all."
I let that one pass, looking away, my eyes wandering again around the spacious room.
He followed my gaze. "Not what you expected, is it?" he asked, his voice smug.
"No," I admitted.
"No coffins, no piled skulls in the corners; I don't even think we have cobwebs… what a disappointment
this must be for you," he continued slyly.
I ignored his teasing. "It's so light… so open."
He was more serious when he answered. "It's the one place we never have to hide."
The song he was still playing, my song, drifted to an end, the final chords shifting to a more melancholy
key. The last note hovered poignantly in the silence.
"Thank you," I murmured. I realized there were tears in my eyes. I dabbed at them, embarrassed.
He touched the corner of my eye, trapping one I missed. He lifted his finger, examining the drop of
moisture broodingly. Then, so quickly I couldn't be positive that he really did, he put his finger to his
mouth to taste it.
I looked at him questioningly, and he gazed back for a long moment before he finally smiled.
"Do you want to see the rest of the house?"
"No coffins?" I verified, the sarcasm in my voice not entirely masking the slight but genuine anxiety I felt.
He laughed, taking my hand, leading me away from the piano.
"No coffins," he promised.
We walked up the massive staircase, my hand trailing along the satin-smooth rail. The long hall at the top
of the stairs was paneled with a honey-colored wood, the same as the floorboards.
"Rosalie and Emmett's room… Carlisle's office… Alice's room…" He gestured as he led me past the
doors.
He would have continued, but I stopped dead at the end of the hall, staring incredulously at the ornament
hanging on the wall above my head. Edward chuckled at my bewildered expression.
"You can laugh," he said. "It is sort of ironic."
I didn't laugh. My hand raised automatically, one finger extended as if to touch the large wooden cross,
its dark patina contrasting with the lighter tone of the wall. I didn't touch it, though I was curious if the
aged wood would feel as silky as it looked.

"You wouldn't."
I didn't see him leap at me — it was much too fast. I only found myself suddenly airborne, and then we
crashed onto the sofa, knocking it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection
around me — I was barely jostled. But I still was gasping as I tried to right myself.
He wasn't having that. He curled me into a ball against his chest, holding me more securely than iron
chains. I glared at him in alarm, but he seemed well in control, his jaw relaxed as he grinned, his eyes
bright only with humor.
"You were saying?" he growled playfully.
"That you are a very, very terrifying monster," I said, my sarcasm marred a bit by my breathless voice.
"Much better," he approved.
"Um." I struggled. "Can I get up now?"
He just laughed.
"Can we come in?" a soft voice sounded from the hall.
I struggled to free myself, but Edward merely readjusted me so that I was somewhat more conventionally
seated on his lap. I could see it was Alice, then, and Jasper behind her in the doorway. My cheeks
burned, but Edward seemed at ease.
"Go ahead." Edward was still chuckling quietly.
Alice seemed to find nothing unusual in our embrace; she walked — almost danced, her movements
were so graceful — to the center of the room, where she folded herself sinuously onto the floor. Jasper,
however, paused at the door, his expression a trifle shocked. He stared at Edward's face, and I
wondered if he was tasting the atmosphere with his unusual sensitivity.
"It sounded like you were having Bella for lunch, and we came to see if you would share," Alice
announced.
I stiffened for an instant, until I realized Edward was grinning — whether at her comment or my response,
I couldn't tell.
"Sorry, I don't believe I have enough to spare," he replied, his arms holding me recklessly close.
"Actually," Jasper said, smiling despite himself as he walked into the room, "Alice says there's going to be
a real storm tonight, and Emmett wants to play ball. Are you game?"
The words were all common enough, but the context confused me. I gathered that Alice was a bit more
reliable than the weatherman, though.
Edward's eyes lit up, but he hesitated.
"Of course you should bring Bella," Alice chirped. I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance at her.
"Do you want to go?" Edward asked me, excited, his expression vivid.
"Sure." I couldn't disappoint such a face. "Um, where are we going?"

"We have to wait for thunder to play ball — you'll see why," he promised.
"Will I need an umbrella?"
They all three laughed aloud.
"Will she?" Jasper asked Alice.
"No." She was positive. "The storm will hit over town. It should be dry enough in the clearing."
"Good, then." The enthusiasm in Jasper's voice was catching, naturally. I found myself eager, rather than
scared stiff.
"Let's go see if Carlisle will come." Alice bounded up and to the door in a fashion that would break any
ballerina's heart.
"Like you don't know," Jasper teased, and they were swiftly on their way. Jasper managed to
inconspicuously close the door behind them.
"What will we be playing?" I demanded.
"You will be watching," Edward clarified. "We will be playing baseball."
I rolled my eyes. "Vampires like baseball?"
"It's the American pastime," he said with mock solemnity.

Then something sunk in.
"Run the whole way? As in, we're still going to run part of the way?" My voice edged up a few octaves.
He grinned tightly. "You're not going to run."
"I'm going to be sick."
"Keep your eyes closed, you'll be fine."
I bit my lip, fighting the panic.
He leaned over to kiss the top of my head, and then groaned. I looked at him, puzzled.
"You smell so good in the rain," he explained.
"In a good way, or in a bad way?" I asked cautiously.
He sighed. "Both, always both."
I don't know how he found his way in the gloom and downpour, but he somehow found a side road that
was less of a road and more of a mountain path. For a long while conversation was impossible, because I
was bouncing up and down on the seat like a jackhammer. He seemed to enjoy the ride, though, smiling
hugely the whole way.
And then we came to the end of the road; the trees formed green walls on three sides of the Jeep. The
rain was a mere drizzle, slowing every second, the sky brighter through the clouds.
"Sorry, Bella, we have to go on foot from here."
"You know what? I'll just wait here."
"What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning."
"I haven't forgotten the last time yet." Could it have been only yesterday?
He was around to my side of the car in a blur. He started unbuckling me.
"I'll get those, you go on ahead," I protested.
"Hmmm…" he mused as he quickly finished. "It seems I'm going to have to tamper with your memory."
Before I could react, he pulled me from the Jeep and set my feet on the ground. It was barely misting
now; Alice was going to be right.
"Tamper with my memory?" I asked nervously.
"Something like that." He was watching me intently, carefully, but there was humor deep in his eyes. He
placed his hands against the Jeep on either side of my head and leaned forward, forcing me to press back
against the door. He leaned in even closer, his face inches from mine. I had no room to escape.
"Now," he breathed, and just his smell disturbed my thought processes, "what exactly are you worrying
about?"
"Well, um, hitting a tree —" I gulped "— and dying. And then getting sick."

interpreted as well-justified frustration — frustration at my weakness, my slowness, my unruly human
reactions…
He put his hands carefully on both sides of my face. "I infuriate myself," he said gently. "The way I can't
seem to keep from putting you in danger. My very existence puts you at risk. Sometimes I truly hate
myself. I should be stronger, I should be able to —"
I placed my hand over his mouth. "Don't."
He took my hand, moving it from his lips, but holding it to his face.
"I love you," he said. "It's a poor excuse for what I'm doing, but it's still true."
It was the first time he'd said he loved me — in so many words. He might not realize it, but I certainly
did.
"Now, please try to behave yourself," he continued, and he bent to softly brush his lips against mine.
I held properly still. Then I sighed.
"You promised Chief Swan that you would have me home early, remember? We'd better get going."
"Yes, ma'am."
He smiled wistfully and released all of me but one hand. He led me a few feet through the tall, wet ferns
and draping moss, around a massive hemlock tree, and we were there, on the edge of an enormous open
field in the lap of the Olympic peaks. It was twice the size of any baseball stadium.
I could see the others all there; Esme, Emmett, and Rosalie, sitting on a bare outcropping of rock, were
the closest to us, maybe a hundred yards away. Much farther out I could see Jasper and Alice, at least a
quarter of a mile apart, appearing to throw something back and forth, but I never saw any ball. It looked
like Carlisle was marking bases, but could they really be that far apart?
When we came into view, the three on the rocks rose.
Esme started toward us. Emmett followed after a long look at Rosalie's back; Rosalie had risen gracefully
and strode off toward the field without a glance in our direction. My stomach quivered uneasily in
response.
"Was that you we heard, Edward?" Esme asked as she approached.
"It sounded like a bear choking," Emmett clarified.
I smiled hesitantly at Esme. "That was him."
"Bella was being unintentionally funny," Edward explained, quickly settling the score.
Alice had left her position and was running, or dancing, toward us. She hurtled to a fluid stop at our feet.
"It's time," she announced.
As soon as she spoke, a deep rumble of thunder shook the forest beyond us, and then crashed westward
toward town.
"Eerie, isn't it?" Emmett said with easy familiarity, winking at me.

"Let's go." Alice reached for Emmett's hand and they darted toward the oversized field; she ran like a
gazelle. He was nearly as graceful and just as fast — yet Emmett could never be compared to a gazelle.
"Are you ready for some ball?" Edward asked, his eyes eager, bright.
I tried to sound appropriately enthusiastic. "Go team!"
He snickered and, after mussing my hair, bounded off after the other two. His run was more aggressive, a
cheetah rather than a gazelle, and he quickly overtook them. The grace and power took my breath away.
"Shall we go down?" Esme asked in her soft, melodic voice, and I realized I was staring openmouthed
after him. I quickly reassembled my expression and nodded. Esme kept a few feet between us, and I
wondered if she was still being careful not to frighten me. She matched her stride to mine without seeming
impatient at the pace.
"You don't play with them?" I asked shyly.
"No, I prefer to referee — I like keeping them honest," she explained.
"Do they like to cheat, then?"
"Oh yes — you should hear the arguments they get into! Actually, I hope you don't, you would think they
were raised by a pack of wolves."
"You sound like my mom," I laughed, surprised.
She laughed, too. "Well, I do think of them as my children in most ways. I never could get over my
mothering instincts — did Edward tell you I had lost a child?"
"No," I murmured, stunned, scrambling to understand what lifetime she was remembering.
"Yes, my first and only baby. He died just a few days after he was born, the poor tiny thing," she sighed.
"It broke my heart — that's why I jumped off the cliff, you know," she added matter-of-factly.
"Edward just said you f-fell," I stammered.
"Always the gentleman." She smiled. "Edward was the first of my new sons. I've always thought of him
that way, even though he's older than I, in one way at least." She smiled at me warmly. "That's why I'm
so happy that he's found you, dear." The endearment sounded very natural on her lips. "He's been the
odd man out for far too long; it's hurt me to see him alone."
"You don't mind, then?" I asked, hesitant again. "That I'm… all wrong for him?"
"No." She was thoughtful. "You're what he wants. It will work out, somehow," she said, though her
forehead creased with worry. Another peal of thunder began.
Esme stopped then; apparently, we'd reached the edge of the field. It looked as if they had formed
teams. Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held
the ball, positioned on the spot that must be the pitcher's mound.
Emmett was swinging an aluminum bat; it whistled almost untraceably through the air. I waited for him to
approach home plate, but then I realized, as he took his stance, that he was already there — farther from
the pitcher's mound than I would have thought possible. Jasper stood several feet behind him, catching
for the other team. Of course, none of them had gloves.

"All right," Esme called in a clear voice, which I knew even Edward would hear, as far out as he was.
"Batter up."
Alice stood straight, deceptively motionless. Her style seemed to be stealth rather than an intimidating
windup. She held the ball in both hands at her waist, and then, like the strike of a cobra, her right hand
flicked out and the ball smacked into Jasper's hand.
"Was that a strike?" I whispered to Esme.
"If they don't hit it, it's a strike," she told me.
Jasper hurled the ball back to Alice's waiting hand. She permitted herself a brief grin. And then her hand
spun out again.
This time the bat somehow made it around in time to smash into the invisible ball. The crack of impact
was shattering, thunderous; it echoed off the mountains — I immediately understood the necessity of the
thunderstorm.
The ball shot like a meteor above the field, flying deep into the surrounding forest.
"Home run," I murmured.
"Wait," Esme cautioned, listening intently, one hand raised. Emmett was a blur around the bases, Carlisle
shadowing him. I realized Edward was missing.
"Out!" Esme cried in a clear voice. I stared in disbelief as Edward sprang from the fringe of the trees, ball
in his upraised hand, his wide grin visible even to me.
"Emmett hits the hardest," Esme explained, "but Edward runs the fastest."
The inning continued before my incredulous eyes. It was impossible to keep up with the speed at which
the ball flew, the rate at which their bodies raced around the field.
I learned the other reason they waited for a thunderstorm to play when Jasper, trying to avoid Edward's
infallible fielding, hit a ground ball toward Carlisle. Carlisle ran into the ball, and then raced Jasper to first
base. When they collided, the sound was like the crash of two massive falling boulders. I jumped up in
concern, but they were somehow unscathed.
"Safe," Esme called in a calm voice.
Emmett's team was up by one — Rosalie managed to flit around the bases after tagging up on one of
Emmett's long flies — when Edward caught the third out. He sprinted to my side, sparkling with
excitement.
"What do you think?" he asked.
"One thing's for sure, I'll never be able to sit through dull old Major League Baseball again."
"And it sounds like you did so much of that before," he laughed.
"I am a little disappointed," I teased.
"Why?" he asked, puzzled.
"Well, it would be nice if I could find just one thing you didn't do better than everyone else on the planet."

He flashed his special crooked smile, leaving me breathless.
"I'm up," he said, heading for the plate.
He played intelligently, keeping the ball low, out of the reach of Rosalie's always-ready hand in the
outfield, gaining two bases like lightning before Emmett could get the ball back in play. Carlisle knocked
one so far out of the field — with a boom that hurt my ears — that he and Edward both made it in. Alice
slapped them dainty high fives.
The score constantly changed as the game continued, and they razzed each other like any street
ballplayers as they took turns with the lead. Occasionally Esme would call them to order. The thunder
rumbled on, but we stayed dry, as Alice had predicted.
Carlisle was up to bat, Edward catching, when Alice suddenly gasped. My eyes were on Edward, as
usual, and I saw his head snap up to look at her. Their eyes met and something flowed between them in
an instant. He was at my side before the others could ask Alice what was wrong.
"Alice?" Esme's voice was tense.
"I didn't see — I couldn't tell," she whispered.
All the others were gathered by this time.
"What is it, Alice?" Carlisle asked with the calm voice of authority.
"They were traveling much quicker than I thought. I can see I had the perspective wrong before," she
murmured.
Jasper leaned over her, his posture protective. "What changed?" he asked.
"They heard us playing, and it changed their path," she said, contrite, as if she felt responsible for
whatever had frightened her.
Seven pairs of quick eyes flashed to my face and away.
"How soon?" Carlisle said, turning toward Edward.
A look of intense concentration crossed his face.
"Less than five minutes. They're running — they want to play." He scowled.
"Can you make it?" Carlisle asked him, his eyes flicking toward me again.
"No, not carrying —" He cut short. "Besides, the last thing we need is for them to catch the scent and
start hunting."
"How many?" Emmett asked Alice.
"Three," she answered tersely.
"Three!" he scoffed. "Let them come." The steel bands of muscle flexed along his massive arms.
For a split second that seemed much longer than it really was, Carlisle deliberated. Only Emmett seemed
unperturbed; the rest stared at Carlisle's face with anxious eyes.
"Let's just continue the game," Carlisle finally decided. His voice was cool and level. "Alice said they

were simply curious."
All this was said in a flurry of words that lasted only a few seconds. I had listened carefully and caught
most of it, though I couldn't hear what Esme now asked Edward with a silent vibration of her lips. I only
saw the slight shake of his head and the look of relief on her face.
"You catch, Esme," he said. "I'll call it now." And he planted himself in front of me.
The others returned to the field, warily sweeping the dark forest with their sharp eyes. Alice and Esme
seemed to orient themselves around where I stood.
"Take your hair down," Edward said in a low, even voice.
I obediently slid the rubber band out of my hair and shook it out around me.
I stated the obvious. "The others are coming now."
"Yes, stay very still, keep quiet, and don't move from my side, please." He hid the stress in his voice well,
but I could hear it. He pulled my long hair forward, around my face.
"That won't help," Alice said softly. "I could smell her across the field."
"I know." A hint of frustration colored his tone.
Carlisle stood at the plate, and the others joined the game halfheartedly.
"What did Esme ask you?" I whispered.
He hesitated for a second before he answered. "Whether they were thirsty," he muttered unwillingly.
The seconds ticked by; the game progressed with apathy now. No one dared to hit harder than a bunt,
and Emmett, Rosalie, and Jasper hovered in the infield. Now and again, despite the fear that numbed my
brain, I was aware of Rosalie's eyes on me. They were expressionless, but something about the way she
held her mouth made me think she was angry.
Edward paid no attention to the game at all, eyes and mind ranging the forest.
"I'm sorry, Bella," he muttered fiercely. "It was stupid, irresponsible, to expose you like this. I'm so
sorry."
I heard his breath stop, and his eyes zeroed in on right field. He took a half step, angling himself between
me and what was coming.
Carlisle, Emmett, and the others turned in the same direction, hearing sounds of passage much too faint
for my ears.

They closed ranks before they continued cautiously toward Edward's family, exhibiting the natural
respect of a troop of predators as it encounters a larger, unfamiliar group of its own kind.
As they approached, I could see how different they were from the Cullens. Their walk was catlike, a gait
that seemed constantly on the edge of shifting into a crouch. They dressed in the ordinary gear of
backpackers: jeans and casual button-down shirts in heavy, weatherproof fabrics. The clothes were
frayed, though, with wear, and they were barefoot. Both men had cropped hair, but the woman's brilliant
orange hair was filled with leaves and debris from the woods.
Their sharp eyes carefully took in the more polished, urbane stance of Carlisle, who, flanked by Emmett
and Jasper, stepped guardedly forward to meet them. Without any seeming communication between
them, they each straightened into a more casual, erect bearing.
The man in front was easily the most beautiful, his skin olive-toned beneath the typical pallor, his hair a
glossy black. He was of a medium build, hard-muscled, of course, but nothing next to Emmett's brawn.
He smiled an easy smile, exposing a flash of gleaming white teeth.
The woman was wilder, her eyes shifting restlessly between the men facing her, and the loose grouping
around me, her chaotic hair quivering in the slight breeze. Her posture was distinctly feline. The second
male hovered unobtrusively behind them, slighter than the leader, his light brown hair and regular features
both nondescript. His eyes, though completely still, somehow seemed the most vigilant.
Their eyes were different, too. Not the gold or black I had come to expect, but a deep burgundy color
that was disturbing and sinister.
The dark-haired man, still smiling, stepped toward Carlisle.
"We thought we heard a game," he said in a relaxed voice with the slightest of French accents. "I'm
Laurent, these are Victoria and James." He gestured to the vampires beside him.
"I'm Carlisle. This is my family, Emmett and Jasper, Rosalie, Esme and Alice, Edward and Bella." He
pointed us out in groups, deliberately not calling attention to individuals. I felt a shock when he said my
name.
"Do you have room for a few more players?" Laurent asked sociably.
Carlisle matched Laurent's friendly tone. "Actually, we were just finishing up. But we'd certainly be
interested another time. Are you planning to stay in the area for long?"
"We're headed north, in fact, but we were curious to see who was in the neighborhood. We haven't run
into any company in a long time."
"No, this region is usually empty except for us and the occasional visitor, like yourselves."
The tense atmosphere had slowly subsided into a casual conversation; I guessed that Jasper was using his
peculiar gift to control the situation.
"What's your hunting range?" Laurent casually inquired.
Carlisle ignored the assumption behind the inquiry. "The Olympic Range here, up and down the Coast
Ranges on occasion. We keep a permanent residence nearby. There's another permanent settlement like
ours up near Denali."
Laurent rocked back on his heels slightly.

"Permanent? How do you manage that?" There was honest curiosity in his voice.
"Why don't you come back to our home with us and we can talk comfortably?" Carlisle invited. "It's a
rather long story."
James and Victoria exchanged a surprised look at the mention of the word "home," but Laurent
controlled his expression better.
"That sounds very interesting, and welcome." His smile was genial. "We've been on the hunt all the way
down from Ontario, and we haven't had the chance to clean up in a while." His eyes moved
appreciatively over Carlisle's refined appearance.
"Please don't take offense, but we'd appreciate it if you'd refrain from hunting in this immediate area. We
have to stay inconspicuous, you understand," Carlisle explained.
"Of course." Laurent nodded. "We certainly won't encroach on your territory. We just ate outside of
Seattle, anyway," he laughed. A shiver ran up my spine.
"We'll show you the way if you'd like to run with us — Emmett and Alice, you can go with Edward and
Bella to get the Jeep," he casually added.
Three things seemed to happen simultaneously while Carlisle was speaking. My hair ruffled with the light
breeze, Edward stiffened, and the second male, James, suddenly whipped his head around, scrutinizing
me, his nostrils flaring.
A swift rigidity fell on all of them as James lurched one step forward into a crouch. Edward bared his
teeth, crouching in defense, a feral snarl ripping from his throat.
It was nothing like the playful sounds I'd heard from him this morning; it was the single most menacing
thing I had ever heard, and chills ran from the crown of my head to the back of my heels.
"What's this?" Laurent exclaimed in open surprise. Neither James nor Edward relaxed their aggressive
poses. James feinted slightly to the side, and Edward shifted in response.
"She's with us." Carlisle's firm rebuff was directed toward James. Laurent seemed to catch my scent less
powerfully than James, but awareness now dawned on his face.
"You brought a snack?" he asked, his expression incredulous as he took an involuntary step forward.
Edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his lip curling high above his glistening, bared teeth.
Laurent stepped back again.
"I said she's with us," Carlisle corrected in a hard voice.
"But she's human," Laurent protested. The words were not at all aggressive, merely astounded.
"Yes." Emmett was very much in evidence at Carlisle's side, his eyes on James. James slowly
straightened out of his crouch, but his eyes never left me, his nostrils still wide. Edward stayed tensed like
a lion in front of me.
When Laurent spoke, his tone was soothing — trying to defuse the sudden hostility. "It appears we have
a lot to learn about each other."
"Indeed." Carlisle's voice was still cool.

"But we'd like to accept your invitation." His eyes flicked toward me and back to Carlisle. "And, of
course, we will not harm the human girl. We won't hunt in your range, as I said."
James glanced in disbelief and aggravation at Laurent and exchanged another brief look with Victoria,
whose eyes still flickered edgily from face to face.
Carlisle measured Laurent's open expression for a moment before he spoke. "We'll show you the way.
Jasper, Rosalie, Esme?" he called. They gathered together, blocking me from view as they converged.
Alice was instantly at my side, and Emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on James as he backed
toward us.
"Let's go, Bella." Edward's voice was low and bleak.
This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow
and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were close behind us, hiding me. I stumbled
alongside Edward, still stunned with fear. I couldn't hear if the main group had left yet. Edward's
impatience was almost tangible as we moved at human speed to the forest edge.
Once we were into the trees, Edward slung me over his back without breaking stride. I gripped as tightly
as possible as he took off, the others close on his heels. I kept my head down, but my eyes, wide with
fright, wouldn't close. They plunged through the now-black forest like wraiths. The sense of exhilaration
that usually seemed to possess Edward as he ran was completely absent, replaced by a fury that
consumed him and drove him still faster. Even with me on his back, the others trailed behind.
We reached the Jeep in an impossibly short time, and Edward barely slowed as he flung me in the
backseat.
"Strap her in," he ordered Emmett, who slid in beside me.
Alice was already in the front seat, and Edward was starting the engine. It roared to life and we swerved
backward, spinning around to face the winding road.
Edward was growling something too fast for me to understand, but it sounded a lot like a string of
profanities.
The jolting trip was much worse this time, and the darkness only made it more frightening. Emmett and
Alice both glared out the side windows.
We hit the main road, and though our speed increased, I could see much better where we were going.
And we were headed south, away from Forks.
"Where are we going?" I asked.
No one answered. No one even looked at me.
"Dammit, Edward! Where are you taking me?"
"We have to get you away from here — far away — now." He didn't look back, his eyes on the road.
The speedometer read a hundred and five miles an hour.
"Turn around! You have to take me home!" I shouted. I struggled with the stupid harness, tearing at the
straps.
"Emmett," Edward said grimly.

And Emmett secured my hands in his steely grasp.
"No! Edward! No, you can't do this."
"I have to, Bella, now please be quiet."
"I won't! You have to take me back — Charlie will call the FBI! They'll be all over your family —
Carlisle and Esme! They'll have to leave, to hide forever!"
"Calm down, Bella." His voice was cold. "We've been there before."
"Not over me, you don't! You're not ruining everything over me!" I struggled violently, with total futility.
Alice spoke for the first time. "Edward, pull over."
He flashed her a hard look, and then sped up.
"Edward, let's just talk this through."
"You don't understand," he roared in frustration. I'd never heard his voice so loud; it was deafening in the
confines of the Jeep. The speedometer neared one hundred and fifteen. "He's a tracker, Alice, did you
see that? He's a tracker!"
I felt Emmett stiffen next to me, and I wondered at his reaction to the word. It meant something more to
the three of them than it did to me; I wanted to understand, but there was no opening for me to ask.
"Pull over, Edward." Alice's tone was reasonable, but there was a ring of authority in it I'd never heard
before.
The speedometer inched passed one-twenty.
"Do it, Edward."
"Listen to me, Alice. I saw his mind. Tracking is his passion, his obsession — and he wants her, Alice —
her, specifically. He begins the hunt tonight."
"He doesn't know where —"
He interrupted her. "How long do you think it will take him to cross her scent in town? His plan was
already set before the words were out of Laurent's mouth."
I gasped, knowing where my scent would lead. "Charlie! You can't leave him there! You can't leave
him!" I thrashed against the harness.
"She's right," Alice said.
The car slowed slightly.
"Let's just look at our options for a minute," Alice coaxed.
The car slowed again, more noticeably, and then suddenly we screeched to a stop on the shoulder of the
highway. I flew against the harness, and then slammed back into the seat.
"There are no options," Edward hissed.
"I'm not leaving Charlie!" I yelled.

He ignored me completely.
"We have to take her back," Emmett finally spoke.
"No." Edward was absolute.
"He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to touch her."
"He'll wait."
Emmett smiled. "I can wait, too."
"You didn't see — you don't understand. Once he commits to a hunt, he's unshakable. We'd have to kill
him."
Emmett didn't seem upset by the idea. "That's an option."
"And the female. She's with him. If it turns into a fight, the leader will go with them, too."
"There are enough of us."
"There's another option," Alice said quietly.
Edward turned on her in fury, his voice a blistering snarl. "There — is — no — other — option!"
Emmett and I both stared at him in shock, but Alice seemed unsurprised. The silence lasted for a long
minute as Edward and Alice stared each other down.
I broke it. "Does anyone want to hear my plan?"
"No," Edward growled. Alice glared at him, finally provoked.
"Listen," I pleaded. "You take me back."
"No," he interrupted.
I glared at him and continued. "You take me back. I tell my dad I want to go home to Phoenix. I pack
my bags. We wait till this tracker is watching, and then we run. He'll follow us and leave Charlie alone.
Charlie won't call the FBI on your family. Then you can take me any damned place you want."
They stared at me, stunned.
"It's not a bad idea, really." Emmett's surprise was definitely an insult.
"It might work — and we simply can't leave her father unprotected. You know that," Alice said.
Everyone looked at Edward.
"It's too dangerous — I don't want him within a hundred miles of her."
Emmett was supremely confident. "Edward, he's not getting through us."
Alice thought for a minute. "I don't see him attacking. He'll try to wait for us to leave her alone."
"It won't take long for him to realize that's not going to happen."
"I demand that you take me home." I tried to sound firm.

Edward pressed his fingers to his temples and squeezed his eyes shut.
"Please," I said in a much smaller voice.
He didn't look up. When he spoke, his voice sounded worn.
"You're leaving tonight, whether the tracker sees or not. You tell Charlie that you can't stand another
minute in Forks. Tell him whatever story works. Pack the first things your hands touch, and then get in
your truck. I don't care what he says to you. You have fifteen minutes. Do you hear me? Fifteen minutes
from the time you cross the doorstep."
The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer
started to race up the dial.
"Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands.
"Oh, sorry." He let me loose.
A few minutes passed in silence, other than the roar of the engine. Then Edward spoke again.
"This is how it's going to happen. When we get to the house, if the tracker is not there, I will walk her to
the door. Then she has fifteen minutes." He glared at me in the rearview mirror. "Emmett, you take the
outside of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as she is. After she's out, you two can
take the Jeep home and tell Carlisle."
"No way," Emmett broke in. "I'm with you."
"Think it through, Emmett. I don't know how long I'll be gone."
"Until we know how far this is going to go, I'm with you."
Edward sighed. "If the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving."
"We're going to make it there before him," Alice said confidently.
Edward seemed to accept that. Whatever his problem with Alice was, he didn't doubt her now.
"What are we going to do with the Jeep?" she asked.
His voice had a hard edge. "You're driving it home."
"No, I'm not," she said calmly.
The unintelligible stream of profanities started again.
"We can't all fit in my truck," I whispered.
Edward didn't appear to hear me.
"I think you should let me go alone," I said even more quietly.
He heard that.
"Bella, please just do this my way, just this once," he said between clenched teeth.
"Listen, Charlie's not an imbecile," I protested. "If you're not in town tomorrow, he's going to get

suspicious."
"That's irrelevant. We'll make sure he's safe, and that's all that matters."
"Then what about this tracker? He saw the way you acted tonight. He's going to think you're with me,
wherever you are."
Emmett looked at me, insultingly surprised again. "Edward, listen to her," he urged. "I think she's right."
"Yes, she is," Alice agreed.
"I can't do that." Edward's voice was icy.
"Emmett should stay, too," I continued. "He definitely got an eyeful of Emmett."
"What?" Emmett turned on me.
"You'll get a better crack at him if you stay," Alice agreed.
Edward stared at her incredulously. "You think I should let her go alone?"
"Of course not," Alice said. "Jasper and I will take her."
"I can't do that," Edward repeated, but this time there was a trace of defeat in his voice. The logic was
working on him.
I tried to be persuasive. "Hang out here for a week —" I saw his expression in the mirror and amended
"— a few days. Let Charlie see you haven't kidnapped me, and lead this James on a wild-goose chase.
Make sure he's completely off my trail. Then come and meet me. Take a roundabout route, of course,
and then Jasper and Alice can go home."
I could see him beginning to consider it.
"Meet you where?"
"Phoenix." Of course.
"No. He'll hear that's where you're going," he said impatiently.
"And you'll make it look like that's a ruse, obviously. He'll know that we'll know that he's listening. He'll
never believe I'm actually going where I say I am going."
"She's diabolical," Emmett chuckled.
"And if that doesn't work?"
"There are several million people in Phoenix," I informed him.
"It's not that hard to find a phone book."
"I won't go home."
"Oh?" he inquired, a dangerous note in his voice.
"I'm quite old enough to get my own place."

"Edward, we'll be with her," Alice reminded him.
"What are you going to do in Phoenix?" he asked her scathingly.
"Stay indoors."
"I kind of like it." Emmett was thinking about cornering James, no doubt.
"Shut up, Emmett."
"Look, if we try to take him down while she's still around, there's a much better chance that someone
will get hurt — she'll get hurt, or you will, trying to protect her. Now, if we get him alone…" He trailed
off with a slow smile. I was right.
The Jeep was crawling slowly along now as we drove into town. Despite my brave talk, I could feel the
hairs on my arms standing up. I thought about Charlie, alone in the house, and tried to be courageous.
"Bella." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything
happen to yourself— anything at all — I'm holding you personally responsible. Do you understand that?"
"Yes," I gulped.
He turned to Alice.
"Can Jasper handle this?"
"Give him some credit, Edward. He's been doing very, very well, all things considered."
"Can you handle this?" he asked.
And graceful little Alice pulled back her lips in a horrific grimace and let loose with a guttural snarl that
had me cowering against the seat in terror.
Edward smiled at her. "But keep your opinions to yourself," he muttered suddenly.

"Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was a command. They slithered soundlessly into the darkness, instantly
disappearing. Edward opened my door and took my hand, then drew me into the protecting enclosure of
his arm. He walked me swiftly toward the house, eyes always roving through the night.
"Fifteen minutes," he warned under his breath.
"I can do this." I sniffled. My tears had given me an inspiration.
I stopped on the porch and took hold of his face in my hands. I looked fiercely into his eyes.
"I love you," I said in a low, intense voice. "I will always love you, no matter what happens now."
"Nothing is going to happen to you, Bella," he said just as fiercely.
"Just follow the plan, okay? Keep Charlie safe for me. He's not going to like me very much after this, and
I want to have the chance to apologize later."
"Get inside, Bella. We have to hurry." His voice was urgent.
"One more thing," I whispered passionately. "Don't listen to another word I say tonight!" He was leaning
in, and so all I had to do was stretch up on my toes to kiss his surprised, frozen lips with as much force
as I was capable of. Then I turned and kicked the door open.
"Go away, Edward!" I yelled at him, running inside and slamming the door shut in his still-shocked face.
"Bella?" Charlie had been hovering in the living room, and he was already on his feet.
"Leave me alone!" I screamed at him through my tears, which were flowing relentlessly now. I ran up the
stairs to my room, throwing the door shut and locking it. I ran to my bed, flinging myself on the floor to
retrieve my duffel bag. I reached swiftly between the mattress and box spring to grab the knotted old
sock that contained my secret cash hoard.
Charlie was pounding on my door.
"Bella, are you okay? What's going on?" His voice was frightened.
"I'm going borne," I shouted, my voice breaking in the perfect spot.
"Did he hurt you?" His tone edged toward anger.
"No!" I shrieked a few octaves higher. I turned to my dresser, and Edward was already there, silently
yanking out armfuls of random clothes, which he proceeded to throw to me.
"Did he break up with you?" Charlie was perplexed.
"No!" I yelled, slightly more breathless as I shoved everything into the bag. Edward threw another
drawer's contents at me. The bag was pretty much full now.
"What happened, Bella?" Charlie shouted through the door, pounding again.
"I broke up with him!" I shouted back, jerking on the zipper of my bag. Edward's capable hands pushed
mine away and zipped it smoothly. He put the strap carefully over my arm.
"I'll be in the truck — go!" he whispered, and pushed me toward the door. He vanished out the window.
I unlocked the door and pushed past Charlie roughly, struggling with my heavy bag as I ran down the

His long hands unexpectedly gripped my waist, and his foot pushed mine off the gas pedal. He pulled me
across his lap, wrenching my hands free of the wheel, and suddenly he was in the driver's seat. The truck
didn't swerve an inch.
"You wouldn't be able to find the house," he explained.
Lights flared suddenly behind us. I stared out the back window, eyes wide with horror.
"It's just Alice," he reassured me. He took my hand again.
My mind was filled with the image of Charlie in the doorway. "The tracker?"
"He heard the end of your performance," Edward said grimly.
"Charlie?" I asked in dread.
"The tracker followed us. He's running behind us now."
My body went cold.
"Can we outrun him?"
"No." But he sped up as he spoke. The truck's engine whined in protest.
My plan suddenly didn't feel so brilliant anymore.
I was staring back at Alice's headlights when the truck shuddered and a dark shadow sprung up outside
the window.
My bloodcurdling scream lasted a fraction of a second before Edward's hand clamped down on my
mouth.
"It's Emmett!"
He released my mouth, and wound his arm around my waist.
"It's okay, Bella," he promised. "You're going to be safe."
We raced through the quiet town toward the north highway.
"I didn't realize you were still so bored with small-town life," he said conversationally, and I knew he was
trying to distract me. "It seemed like you were adjusting fairly well — especially recently. Maybe I was
just flattering myself that I was making life more interesting for you."
"I wasn't being nice," I confessed, ignoring his attempt at diversion, looking down at my knees. "That was
the same thing my mom said when she left him. You could say I was hitting below the belt."
"Don't worry. He'll forgive you." He smiled a little, though it didn't touch his eyes.
I stared at him desperately, and he saw the naked panic in my eyes.
"Bella, it's going to be all right."
"But it won't be all right when I'm not with you," I whispered.
"We'll be together again in a few days," he said, tightening his arm around me. "Don't forget that this was

please, please — trying not to be reckless."
"Is he still following?"
"Yes. He won't attack the house, though. Not tonight."
He turned off onto the invisible drive, with Alice following behind.
We drove right up to the house. The lights inside were bright, but they did little to alleviate the blackness
of the encroaching forest. Emmett had my door open before the truck was stopped; he pulled me out of
the seat, tucked me like a football into his vast chest, and ran me through the door.
We burst into the large white room, Edward and Alice at our sides. All of them were there; they were
already on their feet at the sound of our approach. Laurent stood in their midst. I could hear low growls
rumble deep in Emmett's throat as he set me down next to Edward.
"He's tracking us," Edward announced, glaring balefully at Laurent.
Laurent's face was unhappy. "I was afraid of that."
Alice danced to Jasper's side and whispered in his ear; her lips quivered with the speed of her silent
speech. They flew up the stairs together. Rosalie watched them, and then moved quickly to Emmett's
side. Her beautiful eyes were intense and — when they flickered unwillingly to my face — furious.
"What will he do?" Carlisle asked Laurent in chilling tones.
"I'm sorry," he answered. "I was afraid, when your boy there defended her, that it would set him off."
"Can you stop him?"
Laurent shook his head. "Nothing stops James when he gets started."
"We'll stop him," Emmett promised. There was no doubt what he meant.
"You can't bring him down. I've never seen anything like him in my three hundred years. He's absolutely
lethal. That's why I joined his coven."
His coven, I thought, of course. The show of leadership in the clearing was merely that, a show.
Laurent was shaking his head. He glanced at me, perplexed, and back to Carlisle. "Are you sure it's
worth it?"
Edward's enraged roar filled the room; Laurent cringed back.
Carlisle looked gravely at Laurent. "I'm afraid you're going to have to make a choice."
Laurent understood. He deliberated for a moment. His eyes took in every face, and finally swept the
bright room.
"I'm intrigued by the life you've created here. But I won't get in the middle of this. I bear none of you any
enmity, but I won't go up against James. I think I will head north — to that clan in Denali." He hesitated.
"Don't underestimate James. He's got a brilliant mind and unparalleled senses. He's every bit as
comfortable in the human world as you seem to be, and he won't come at you head on… I'm sorry for
what's been unleashed here. Truly sorry." He bowed his head, but I saw him flicker another puzzled look
at me.

"Go in peace," was Carlisle's formal answer.
Laurent took another long look around himself, and then he hurried out the door.
The silence lasted less than a second.
"How close?" Carlisle looked to Edward.
Esme was already moving; her hand touched an inconspicuous keypad on the wall, and with a groan,
huge metal shutters began sealing up the glass wall. I gaped.
"About three miles out past the river; he's circling around to meet up with the female."
"What's the plan?"
"We'll lead him off, and then Jasper and Alice will run her south."
"And then?"
Edward's tone was deadly. "As soon as Bella is clear, we hunt him."
"I guess there's no other choice," Carlisle agreed, his face grim.
Edward turned to Rosalie.
"Get her upstairs and trade clothes," Edward commanded. She stared back at him with livid disbelief.
"Why should I?" she hissed. "What is she to me? Except a menace — a danger you've chosen to inflict
on all of us."
I flinched back from the venom in her voice.
"Rose…" Emmett murmured, putting one hand on her shoulder. She shook it off.
But I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction.
He surprised me. He looked away from Rosalie as if she hadn't spoken, as if she didn't exist.
"Esme?" he asked calmly.
"Of course," Esme murmured.
Esme was at my side in half a heartbeat, swinging me up easily into her arms, and dashing up the stairs
before I could gasp in shock.
"What are we doing?" I asked breathlessly as she set me down in a dark room somewhere off the
second-story hall.
"Trying to confuse the smell. It won't work for long, but it might help get you out." I could hear her
clothes falling to the floor.
"I don't think I'll fit…" I hesitated, but her hands were abruptly pulling my shirt over my head. I quickly
stripped my jeans off myself. She handed me something, it felt like a shirt. I struggled to get my arms
through the right holes. As soon as I was done she handed me her slacks. I yanked them on, but I
couldn't get my feet out; they were too long. She deftly rolled the hems a few times so I could stand.
Somehow she was already in my clothes. She pulled me back to the stairs, where Alice stood, a small

leather bag in one hand. They each grabbed one of my elbows and half-carried me as they flew down the
stairs.
It appeared that everything had been settled downstairs in our absence. Edward and Emmett were ready
to leave, Emmett carrying a heavy-looking backpack over his shoulder. Carlisle was handing something
small to Esme. He turned and handed Alice the same thing — it was a tiny silver cell phone.
"Esme and Rosalie will be taking your truck, Bella," he told me as he passed. I nodded, glancing warily at
Rosalie. She was glowering at Carlisle with a resentful expression.
"Alice, Jasper — take the Mercedes. You'll need the dark tint in the south."
They nodded as well.
"We're taking the Jeep."
I was surprised to see that Carlisle intended to go with Edward. I realized suddenly, with a stab of fear,
that they made up the hunting party.
"Alice," Carlisle asked, "will they take the bait?"
Everyone watched Alice as she closed her eyes and became incredibly still.
Finally her eyes opened. "He'll track you. The woman will follow the truck. We should be able to leave
after that." Her voice was certain.
"Let's go." Carlisle began to walk toward the kitchen.
But Edward was at my side at once. He caught me up in his iron grip, crushing me to him. He seemed
unaware of his watching family as he pulled my face to his, lifting my feet off the floor. For the shortest
second, his lips were icy and hard against mine. Then it was over. He set me down, still holding my face,
his glorious eyes burning into mine.
His eyes went blank, curiously dead, as he turned away.
And they were gone.
We stood there, the others looking away from me as the tears streaked noiselessly down my face.
The silent moment dragged on, and then Esme's phone vibrated in her hand. It flashed to her ear.
"Now," she said. Rosalie stalked out the front door without another glance in my direction, but Esme
touched my cheek as she passed.
"Be safe." Her whisper lingered behind them as they slipped out the door. I heard my truck start
thunderously, and then fade away.
Jasper and Alice waited. Alice's phone seemed to be at her ear before it buzzed.
"Edward says the woman is on Esme's trail. I'll get the car." She vanished into the shadows the way
Edward had gone.
Jasper and I looked at each other. He stood across the length of the entryway from me… being careful.
"You're wrong, you know," he said quietly.

"What?" I gasped.
"I can feel what you're feeling now — and you are worth it."
"I'm not," I mumbled. "If anything happens to them, it will be for nothing."
"You're wrong," he repeated, smiling kindly at me.
I heard nothing, but then Alice stepped through the front door and came toward me with her arms held
out.
"May I?" she asked.
"You're the first one to ask permission." I smiled wryly.
She lifted me in her slender arms as easily as Emmett had, shielding me protectively, and then we flew out
the door, leaving the lights bright behind us.

When I woke up I was confused. My thoughts were hazy, still twisted up in dreams and nightmares; it
took me longer than it should have to realize where I was.
This room was too bland to belong anywhere but in a hotel. The bedside lamps, bolted to the tables,
were a dead giveaway, as were the long drapes made from the same fabric as the bedspread, and the
generic watercolor prints on the walls.
I tried to remember how I got here, but nothing came at first.
I did remember the sleek black car, the glass in the windows darker than that on a limousine. The engine
was almost silent, though we'd raced across the black freeways at more than twice the legal speed.
And I remembered Alice sitting with me on the dark leather backseat. Somehow, during the long night,
my head had ended up against her granite neck. My closeness didn't seem to bother her at all, and her
cool, hard skin was oddly comforting to me. The front of her thin cotton shirt was cold, damp with the
tears that streamed from my eyes until, red and sore, they ran dry.
Sleep had evaded me; my aching eyes strained open even though the night finally ended and dawn broke
over a low peak somewhere in California. The gray light, streaking across the cloudless sky, stung my
eyes. But I couldn't close them; when I did, the images that flashed all too vividly, like still slides behind
my lids, were unbearable. Charlie's broken expression — Edward's brutal snarl, teeth bared — Rosalie's
resentful glare — the keen-eyed scrutiny of the tracker — the dead look in Edward's eyes after he
kissed me the last time… I couldn't stand to see them. So I fought against my weariness and the sun rose
higher.
I was still awake when we came through a shallow mountain pass and the sun, behind us now, reflected
off the tiled rooftops of the Valley of the Sun. I didn't have enough emotion left to be surprised that we'd
made a three-day journey in one. I stared blankly at the wide, flat expanse laid out in front of me.
Phoenix — the palm trees, the scrubby creosote, the haphazard lines of the intersecting freeways, the
green swaths of golf courses and turquoise splotches of swimming pools, all submerged in a thin smog
and embraced by the short, rocky ridges that weren't really big enough to be called mountains.

The shadows of the palm trees slanted across the freeway — defined, sharper than I remembered, paler
than they should be. Nothing could hide in these shadows. The bright, open freeway seemed benign
enough. But I felt no relief, no sense of homecoming.
"Which way to the airport, Bella?" Jasper had asked, and I flinched, though his voice was quite soft and
un-alarming. It was the first sound, besides the purr of the car, to break the long night's silence.
"Stay on the I-ten," I'd answered automatically. "We'll pass right by it."
My brain had worked slowly through the fog of sleep deprivation.
"Are we flying somewhere?" I'd asked Alice.
"No, but it's better to be close, just in case."
I remembered beginning the loop around Sky Harbor International… but not ending it. I suppose that
must have been when I'd fallen asleep.
Though, now that I'd chased the memories down, I did have a vague impression of leaving the car — the
sun was just falling behind the horizon — my arm draped over Alice's shoulder and her arm firm around
my waist, dragging me along as I stumbled through the warm, dry shadows.
I had no memory of this room.
I looked at the digital clock on the nightstand. The red numbers claimed it was three o'clock, but they
gave no indication if it was night or day. No edge of light escaped the thick curtains, but the room was
bright with the light from the lamps.
I rose stiffly and staggered to the window, pulling back the drapes.
It was dark outside. Three in the morning, then. My room looked out on a deserted section of the
freeway and the new long-term parking garage for the airport. It was slightly comforting to be able to
pinpoint time and place.
I looked down at myself. I was still wearing Esme's clothes, and they didn't fit very well at all. I looked
around the room, glad when I discovered my duffel bag on top of the low dresser.
I was on my way to find new clothes when a light tap on the door made me jump.
"Can I come in?" Alice asked.
I took a deep breath. "Sure."
She walked in, and looked me over cautiously. "You look like you could sleep longer," she said.
I just shook my head.
She drifted silently to the curtains and closed them securely before turning back to me.
"We'll need to stay inside," she told me.
"Okay." My voice was hoarse; it cracked.
"Thirsty?" she asked.
I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?"

"Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front room. Edward
reminded me that you have to eat a lot more frequently than we do."
I was instantly more alert. "He called?"
"No," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left."
She took my hand carefully and led me through the door into the living room of the hotel suite. I could
hear a low buzz of voices coming from the TV. Jasper sat motionlessly at the desk in the corner, his eyes
watching the news with no glimmer of interest.
I sat on the floor next to the coffee table, where a tray of food waited, and began picking at it without
noticing what I was eating.
Alice perched on the arm of the sofa and stared blankly at the TV like Jasper.
I ate slowly, watching her, turning now and then to glance quickly at Jasper. It began to dawn on me that
they were too still. They never looked away from the screen, though commercials were playing now. I
pushed the tray away, my stomach abruptly uneasy. Alice looked down at me.
"What's wrong, Alice?" I asked.
"Nothing's wrong." Her eyes were wide, honest… and I didn't trust them.
"What do we do now?"
"We wait for Carlisle to call."
"And should he have called by now?" I could see that I was near the mark. Alice's eyes flitted from mine
to the phone on top of her leather bag and back.
"What does that mean?" My voice quavered, and I fought to control it. "That he hasn't called yet?"
"It just means that they don't have anything to tell us."
But her voice was too even, and the air was harder to breathe.
Jasper was suddenly beside Alice, closer to me than usual.
"Bella," he said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "You have nothing to worry about. You are completely
safe here."
"I know that."
"Then why are you frightened?" he asked, confused. He might feel the tenor of my emotions, but he
couldn't read the reasons behind them.
"You heard what Laurent said." My voice was just a whisper, but I was sure they could hear me. "He
said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to
any of them, Carlisle, Emmett… Edward…" I gulped. "If that wild female hurts Esme…" My voice had
grown higher, a note of hysteria beginning to rise in it. "How could I live with myself when it's my fault?
None of you should be risking yourselves for me —"
"Bella, Bella, stop," he interrupted me, his words pouring out so quickly they were hard to understand.
"You're worrying about all the wrong things, Bella. Trust me on this — none of us are in jeopardy. You

are under too much strain as it is; don't add to it with wholly unnecessary worries. Listen to me!" he
ordered, for I had looked away. "Our family is strong. Our only fear is losing you."
"But why should you —"
Alice interrupted this time, touching my cheek with her cold fingers. "It's been almost a century that
Edward's been alone. Now he's found you. You can't see the changes that we see, we who have been
with him for so long. Do you think any of us want to look into his eyes for the next hundred years if he
loses you?"
My guilt slowly subsided as I looked into her dark eyes. But, even as the calm spread over me, I knew I
couldn't trust my feelings with Jasper there.
It was a very long day.
We stayed in the room. Alice called down to the front desk and asked them to ignore our maid service
for now. The windows stayed shut, the TV on, though no one watched it. At regular intervals, food was
delivered for me. The silver phone resting on Alice's bag seemed to grow bigger as the hours passed.
My babysitters handled the suspense better than I did. As I fidgeted and paced, they simply grew more
still, two statues whose eyes followed me imperceptibly as I moved. I occupied myself with memorizing
the room; the striped pattern of the couches, tan, peach, cream, dull gold, and tan again. Sometimes I
stared at the abstract prints, randomly finding pictures in the shapes, like I'd found pictures in the clouds
as a child. I traced a blue hand, a woman combing her hair, a cat stretching. But when the pale red circle
became a staring eye, I looked away.
As the afternoon wore on, I went back to bed, simply for something to do. I hoped that by myself in the
dark, I could give in to the terrible fears that hovered on the edge of my consciousness, unable to break
through under Jasper's careful supervision.
But Alice followed me casually, as if by some coincidence she had grown tired of the front room at the
same time. I was beginning to wonder exactly what sort of instructions Edward had given her. I lay
across the bed, and she sat, legs folded, next to me. I ignored her at first, suddenly tired enough to sleep.
But after a few minutes, the panic that had held off in Jasper's presence began to make itself known. I
gave up on the idea of sleep quickly then, curling up into a small ball, wrapping my arms around my legs.
"Alice?" I asked.
"Yes?"
I kept my voice very calm. "What do you think they're doing?"
"Carlisle wanted to lead the tracker as far north as possible, wait for him to get close, and then turn and
ambush him. Esme and Rosalie were supposed to head west as long as they could keep the female
behind them. If she turned around, they were to head back to Forks and keep an eye on your dad. So I
imagine things are going well if they can't call. It means the tracker is close enough that they don't want
him to overhear."
"And Esme?"
"I think she must be back in Forks. She won't call if there's any chance the female will overhear. I expect
they're all just being very careful."
"Do you think they're safe, really?"

"Bella, how many times do we have to tell you that there's no danger to us?"
"Would you tell me the truth, though?"
"Yes. I will always tell you the truth." Her voice was earnest.
I deliberated for a moment, and decided she meant it.
"Tell me then… how do you become a vampire?"
My question caught her off guard. She was quiet. I rolled over to look at her, and her expression seemed
ambivalent.
"Edward doesn't want me to tell you that," she said firmly, but I sensed she didn't agree.
"That's not fair. I think I have a right to know."
"I know."
I looked at her, waiting.
She sighed. "He'll be extremely angry."
"It's none of his business. This is between you and me. Alice, as a friend, I'm begging you." And we were
friends now, somehow — as she must have known we would be all along.
She looked at me with her splendid, wise eyes… choosing.
"I'll tell you the mechanics of it," she said finally, "but I don't remember it myself, and I've never done it or
seen it done, so keep in mind that I can only tell you the theory."
I waited.
"As predators, we have a glut of weapons in our physical arsenal — much, much more than really
necessary. The strength, the speed, the acute senses, not to mention those of us like Edward, Jasper, and
I, who have extra senses as well. And then, like a carnivorous flower, we are physically attractive to our
prey."
I was very still, remembering how pointedly Edward had demonstrated the same concept for me in the
meadow.
She smiled a wide, ominous smile. "We have another fairly superfluous weapon. We're also venomous,"
she said, her teeth glistening. "The venom doesn't kill — it's merely incapacitating. It works slowly,
spreading through the bloodstream, so that, once bitten, our prey is in too much physical pain to escape
us. Mostly superfluous, as I said. If we're that close, the prey doesn't escape. Of course, there are
always exceptions. Carlisle, for example."
"So… if the venom is left to spread…" I murmured.
"It takes a few days for the transformation to be complete, depending on how much venom is in the
bloodstream, how close the venom enters to the heart. As long as the heart keeps beating, the poison
spreads, healing, changing the body as it moves through it. Eventually the heart stops, and the conversion
is finished. But all that time, every minute of it, a victim would be wishing for death."
I shivered.

"It's not pleasant, you see."
"Edward said that it was very hard to do… I don't quite understand," I said.
"We're also like sharks in a way. Once we taste the blood, or even smell it for that matter, it becomes
very hard to keep from feeding. Sometimes impossible. So you see, to actually bite someone, to taste the
blood, it would begin the frenzy. It's difficult on both sides — the blood-lust on the one hand, the awful
pain on the other."
"Why do you think you don't remember?"
"I don't know. For everyone else, the pain of transformation is the sharpest memory they have of their
human life. I remember nothing of being human." Her voice was wistful.
We lay silently, wrapped in our individual meditations.
The seconds ticked by, and I had almost forgotten her presence, I was so enveloped in my thoughts.
Then, without any warning, Alice leaped from the bed, landing lightly on her feet. My head jerked up as I
stared at her, startled.
"Something's changed." Her voice was urgent, and she wasn't talking to me anymore.
She reached the door at the same time Jasper did. He had obviously heard our conversation and her
sudden exclamation. He put his hands on her shoulders and guided her back to the bed, sitting her on the
edge.
"What do you see?" he asked intently, staring into her eyes. Her eyes were focused on something very far
away. I sat close to her, leaning in to catch her low, quick voice.
"I see a room. It's long, and there are mirrors everywhere. The floor is wooden. He's in the room, and
he's waiting. There's gold… a gold stripe across the mirrors."
"Where is the room?"
"I don't know. Something is missing — another decision hasn't been made yet."
"How much time?"
"It's soon. He'll be in the mirror room today, or maybe tomorrow. It all depends. He's waiting for
something. And he's in the dark now."
Jasper's voice was calm, methodical, as he questioned her in a practiced way. "What is he doing?"
"He's watching TV… no, he's running a VCR, in the dark, in another place."
"Can you see where he is?"
"No, it's too dark."
"And the mirror room, what else is there?"
"Just the mirrors, and the gold. It's a band, around the room. And there's a black table with a big stereo,
and a TV. He's touching the VCR there, but he doesn't watch the way he does in the dark room. This is
the room where he waits." Her eyes drifted, then focused on Jasper's face.

"There's nothing else?"
She shook her head. They looked at each other, motionless.
"What does it mean?" I asked.
Neither of them answered for a moment, then Jasper looked at me.
"It means the tracker's plans have changed. He's made a decision that will lead him to the mirror room,
and the dark room."
"But we don't know where those rooms are?"
"No."
"But we do know that he won't be in the mountains north of Washington, being hunted. He'll elude them."
Alice's voice was bleak.
"Should we call?" I asked. They traded a serious look, undecided.
And the phone rang.
Alice was across the room before I could lift my head to look at it.
She pushed a button and held the phone to her ear, but she didn't speak first.
"Carlisle," she breathed. She didn't seem surprised or relieved, the way I felt.
"Yes," she said, glancing at me. She listened for a long moment.
"I just saw him." She described again the vision she'd seen. "Whatever made him get on that plane… it
was leading him to those rooms." She paused. "Yes," Alice said into the phone, and then she spoke to
me. "Bella?"
She held the phone out toward me. I ran to it.
"Hello?" I breathed.
"Bella," Edward said.
"Oh, Edward! I was so worried."
"Bella," he sighed in frustration, "I told you not to worry about anything but yourself." It was so
unbelievably good to hear his voice. I felt the hovering cloud of despair lighten and drift back as he
spoke.
"Where are you?"
"We're outside of Vancouver. Bella, I'm sorry — we lost him. He seems suspicious of us — he's careful
to stay just far enough away that I can't hear what he's thinking. But he's gone now — it looks like he got
on a plane. We think he's heading back to Forks to start over." I could hear Alice filling in Jasper behind
me, her quick words blurring together into a humming noise.
"I know. Alice saw that he got away."
"You don't have to worry, though. He won't find anything to lead him to you. You just have to stay there

and wait till we find him again."
"I'll be fine. Is Esme with Charlie?"
"Yes — the female has been in town. She went to the house, but while Charlie was at work. She hasn't
gone near him, so don't be afraid. He's safe with Esme and Rosalie watching."
"What is she doing?"
"Probably trying to pick up the trail. She's been all through the town during the night. Rosalie traced her
through the airport, all the roads around town, the school… she's digging, Bella, but there's nothing to
find."
"And you're sure Charlie's safe?"
"Yes, Esme won't let him out of her sight. And we'll be there soon. If the tracker gets anywhere near
Forks, we'll have him."
"I miss you," I whispered.
"I know, Bella. Believe me, I know. It's like you've taken half my self away with you."
"Come and get it, then," I challenged.
"Soon, as soon as I possibly can. I will make you safe first." His voice was hard.
"I love you," I reminded him.
"Could you believe that, despite everything I've put you through, I love you, too?"
"Yes, I can, actually."
"I'll come for you soon."
"I'll be waiting."
As soon as the phone went dead, the cloud of depression began to creep over me again.
I turned to give the phone back to Alice and found her and Jasper bent over the table, where Alice was
sketching on a piece of hotel stationery. I leaned on the back of the couch, looking over her shoulder.
She drew a room: long, rectangular, with a thinner, square section at the back. The wooden planks that
made up the floor stretched lengthwise across the room. Down the walls were lines denoting the breaks
in the mirrors. And then, wrapping around the walls, waist high, a long band. The band Alice said was
gold.
"It's a ballet studio," I said, suddenly recognizing the familiar shapes.
They looked at me, surprised.
"Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was an undercurrent of something I
couldn't identify. Alice bent her head to her work, her hand flying across the page now, the shape of an
emergency exit taking shape against the back wall, the stereo and TV on a low table by the front right
corner.
"It looks like a place I used to go for dance lessons — when I was eight or nine. It was shaped just the

same." I touched the page where the square section jutted out, narrowing the back part of the room.
"That's where the bathrooms were — the doors were through the other dance floor. But the stereo was
here" — I pointed to the left corner — "it was older, and there wasn't a TV. There was a window in the
waiting room — you would see the room from this perspective if you looked through it."
Alice and Jasper were staring at me.
"Are you sure it's the same room?" Jasper asked, still calm.
"No, not at all — I suppose most dance studios would look the same — the mirrors, the bar." I traced
my finger along the ballet bar set against the mirrors. "It's just the shape that looked familiar." I touched
the door, set in exactly the same place as the one I remembered.
"Would you have any reason to go there now?" Alice asked, breaking my reverie.
"No, I haven't been there in almost ten years. I was a terrible dancer — they always put me in the back
for recitals," I admitted.
"So there's no way it could be connected with you?" Alice asked intently.
"No, I don't even think the same person owns it. I'm sure it's just another dance studio, somewhere."
"Where was the studio you went to?" Jasper asked in a casual voice.
"It was just around the corner from my mom's house. I used to walk there after school…" I said, my
voice trailing off. I didn't miss the look they exchanged.
"Here in Phoenix, then?" His voice was still casual.
"Yes," I whispered. "Fifty-eighth Street and Cactus."
We all sat in silence, staring at the drawing.
"Alice, is that phone safe?"
"Yes," she reassured me. "The number would just trace back to Washington."
"Then I can use it to call my mom."
"I thought she was in Florida."
"She is — but she's coming home soon, and she can't come back to that house while…" My voice
trembled. I was thinking about something Edward had said, about the red-haired female at Charlie's
house, at the school, where my records would be.
"How will you reach her?"
"They don't have a permanent number except at the house — she's supposed to check her messages
regularly."
"Jasper?" Alice asked.
He thought about it. "I don't think there's any way it could hurt — be sure you don't say where you are,
of course."
I reached eagerly for the phone and dialed the familiar number. It rang four times, and then I heard my

mom's breezy voice telling me to leave a message.
"Mom," I said after the beep, "it's me. Listen, I need you to do something. It's important. As soon as you
get this message, call me at this number." Alice was already at my side, writing the number for me on the
bottom of her picture. I read it carefully, twice. "Please don't go anywhere until you talk to me. Don't
worry, I'm okay, but I have to talk to you right away, no matter how late you get this call, all right? I love
you, Mom. Bye." I closed my eyes and prayed with all my might that no unforeseen change of plans
would bring her home before she got my message.
I settled into the sofa, nibbling on a plate of leftover fruit, anticipating a long evening. I thought about
calling Charlie, but I wasn't sure if I should be home by now or not. I concentrated on the news, watching
out for stories about Florida, or about spring training — strikes or hurricanes or terrorist attacks —
anything that might send them home early.
Immortality must grant endless patience. Neither Jasper nor Alice seemed to feel the need to do anything
at all. For a while, Alice sketched the vague outline of the dark room from her vision, as much as she
could see in the light from the TV. But when she was done, she simply sat, looking at the blank walls with
her timeless eyes. Jasper, too, seemed to have no urge to pace, or peek through the curtains, or run
screaming out the door, the way I did.
I must have fallen asleep on the couch, waiting for the phone to ring again. The touch of Alice's cold
hands woke me briefly as she carried me to the bed, but I was unconscious again before my head hit the
pillow.

I could feel it was too early again when I woke, and I knew I was getting the schedule of my days and
nights slowly reversed. I lay in my bed and listened to the quiet voices of Alice and Jasper in the other
room. That they were loud enough for me to hear at all was strange. I rolled till my feet touched the floor
and then staggered to the living room.
The clock on the TV said it was just after two in the morning. Alice and Jasper were sitting together on
the sofa, Alice sketching again while Jasper looked over her shoulder. They didn't look up when I
entered, too engrossed in Alice's work.
I crept to Jasper's side to peek.
"Did she see something more?" I asked him quietly.
"Yes. Something's brought him back to the room with the VCR, but it's light now."
I watched as Alice drew a square room with dark beams across its low ceiling. The walls were paneled
in wood, a little too dark, out of date. The floor had a dark carpet with a pattern in it. There was a large
window against the south wall, and an opening through the west wall led to the living room. One side of
that entrance was stone — a large tan stone fireplace that was open to both rooms. The focus of the
room from this perspective, the TV and VCR, balanced on a too-small wooden stand, were in the
southwest corner of the room. An aged sectional sofa curved around in front of the TV, a round coffee
table in front of it.
"The phone goes there," I whispered, pointing.

Two pairs of eternal eyes stared at me.
"That's my mother's house."
Alice was already off the couch, phone in hand, dialing. I stared at the precise rendering of my mother's
family room. Uncharacteristically, Jasper slid closer to me. He lightly touched his hand to my shoulder,
and the physical contact seemed to make his calming influence stronger. The panic stayed dull,
unfocused.
Alice's lips were trembling with the speed of her words, the low buzzing impossible to decipher. I
couldn't concentrate.
"Bella," Alice said. I looked at her numbly.
"Bella, Edward is coming to get you. He and Emmett and Carlisle are going to take you somewhere, to
hide you for a while."
"Edward is coming?" The words were like a life vest, holding my head above the flood.
"Yes, he's catching the first flight out of Seattle. We'll meet him at the airport, and you'll leave with him."
"But, my mother… he came here for my mother, Alice!" Despite Jasper, the hysteria bubbled up in my
voice.
"Jasper and I will stay till she's safe."
"I can't win, Alice. You can't guard everyone I know forever. Don't you see what he's doing? He's not
tracking me at all. He'll find someone, he'll hurt someone I love… Alice, I can't —"
"We'll catch him, Bella," she assured me.
"And what if you get hurt, Alice? Do you think that's okay with me? Do you think it's only my human
family he can hurt me with?"
Alice looked meaningfully at Jasper. A deep, heavy fog of lethargy washed over me, and my eyes closed
without my permission. My mind struggled against the fog, realizing what was happening. I forced my
eyes open and stood up, stepping away from Jasper's hand.
"I don't want to go back to sleep," I snapped.
I walked to my room and shut the door, slammed it really, so I could be free to go to pieces privately.
This time Alice didn't follow me. For three and a half hours I stared at the wall, curled in a ball, rocking.
My mind went around in circles, trying to come up with some way out of this nightmare. There was no
escape, no reprieve. I could see only one possible end looming darkly in my future. The only question
was how many other people would be hurt before I reached it.
The only solace, the only hope I had left, was knowing that I would see Edward soon. Maybe, if I could
just see his face again, I would also be able to see the solution that eluded me now.
When the phone rang, I returned to the front room, a little ashamed of my behavior. I hoped I hadn't
offended either of them, that they would know how grateful I was for the sacrifices they were making on
my account.
Alice was talking as rapidly as ever, but what caught my attention was that, for the first time, Jasper was
not in the room. I looked at the clock — it was five-thirty in the morning.

"They're just boarding their plane," Alice told me. "They'll land at nine-forty-five." Just a few more hours
to keep breathing till he was here.
"Where's Jasper?"
"He went to check out."
"You aren't staying here?"
"No, we're relocating closer to your mother's house."
My stomach twisted uneasily at her words.
But the phone rang again, distracting me. She looked surprised, but I was already walking forward,
reaching hopefully for the phone.
"Hello?" Alice asked. "No, she's right here." She held the phone out to me. Your mother, she mouthed.
"Hello?"
"Bella? Bella?" It was my mother's voice, in a familiar tone I had heard a thousand times in my childhood,
anytime I'd gotten too close to the edge of the sidewalk or strayed out of her sight in a crowded place. It
was the sound of panic.
I sighed. I'd been expecting this, though I'd tried to make my message as unalarming as possible without
lessening the urgency of it.
"Calm down, Mom," I said in my most soothing voice, walking slowly away from Alice. I wasn't sure if I
could lie as convincingly with her eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a minute and I'll
explain everything, I promise."
I paused, surprised that she hadn't interrupted me yet.
"Mom?"
"Be very careful not to say anything until I tell you to." The voice I heard now was as unfamiliar as it was
unexpected. It was a man's tenor voice, a very pleasant, generic voice — the kind of voice that you
heard in the background of luxury car commercials. He spoke very quickly.
"Now, I don't need to hurt your mother, so please do exactly as I say, and she'll be fine." He paused for
a minute while I listened in mute horror. "That's very good," he congratulated. "Now repeat after me, and
do try to sound natural. Please say, "No, Mom, stay where you are.'"
"No, Mom, stay where you are." My voice was barely more than a whisper.
"I can see this is going to be difficult." The voice was amused, still light and friendly. "Why don't you walk
into another room now so your face doesn't ruin everything? There's no reason for your mother to suffer.
As you're walking, please say, "Mom, please listen to me." Say it now."
"Mom, please listen to me," my voice pleaded. I walked very slowly to the bedroom, feeling Alice's
worried stare on my back. I shut the door behind me, trying to think clearly through the terror that
gripped my brain.
"There now, are you alone? Just answer yes or no."

"Say, "I love you, Mom, I'll see you soon." Say it now."
"I love you, Mom." My voice was thick. "I'll see you soon," I promised.
"Goodbye, Bella. I look forward to seeing you again." He hung up.
I held the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't unbend my fingers to drop it.
I knew I had to think, but my head was filled with the sound of my mother's panic. Seconds ticked by
while I fought for control.
Slowly, slowly, my thoughts started to break past that brick wall of pain. To plan. For I had no choices
now but one: to go to the mirrored room and die. I had no guarantees, nothing to give to keep my mother
alive. I could only hope that James would be satisfied with winning the game, that beating Edward would
be enough. Despair gripped me; there was no way to bargain, nothing I could offer or withhold that could
influence him. But I still had no choice. I had to try.
I pushed the terror back as well as I could. My decision was made. It did no good to waste time
agonizing over the outcome. I had to think clearly, because Alice and Jasper were waiting for me, and
evading them was absolutely essential, and absolutely impossible.
I was suddenly grateful that Jasper was gone. If he had been here to feel my anguish in the last five
minutes, how could I have kept them from being suspicious? I choked back the dread, the anxiety, tried
to stifle it. I couldn't afford it now. I didn't know when he would return.
I concentrated on my escape. I had to hope that my familiarity with the airport would turn the odds in my
favor. Somehow, I had to keep Alice away…
I knew Alice was in the other room waiting for me, curious. But I had to deal with one more thing in
private, before Jasper was back.
I had to accept that I wouldn't see Edward again, not even one last glimpse of his face to carry with me
to the mirror room. I was going to hurt him, and I couldn't say goodbye. I let the waves of torture wash
over me, have their way for a time. Then I pushed them back, too, and went to face Alice.
The only expression I could manage was a dull, dead look. I saw her alarm and I didn't wait for her to
ask. I had just one script and I'd never manage improvisation now.
"My mom was worried, she wanted to come home. But it's okay, I convinced her to stay away." My
voice was lifeless.
"We'll make sure she's fine, Bella, don't worry."
I turned away; I couldn't let her see my face.
My eye fell on a blank page of the hotel stationery on the desk. I went to it slowly, a plan forming. There
was an envelope there, too. That was good.
"Alice," I asked slowly, without turning, keeping my voice level. "If I write a letter for my mother, would
you give it to her? Leave it at the house, I mean."
"Sure, Bella." Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to keep my
emotions under better control.
I went into the bedroom again, and knelt next to the little bedside table to write.

I love you. I am so sorry. He has my mom, and I have to try. I know it may not work. I am so very,
very sorry.
Don't be angry with Alice and Jasper. If I get away from them it will be a miracle. Tell them thank
you for me. Alice especially, please.
And please, please, don't come after him. That's what he wants. I think. I can't bear it if anyone
has to be hurt because of me, especially you. Please, this is the only thing I can ask you now. For
me.
I love you. Forgive me.
Bella

It had taken much less time than I'd thought — all the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart. The
minutes were ticking by more slowly than usual. Jasper still hadn't come back when I returned to Alice. I
was afraid to be in the same room with her, afraid that she would guess… and afraid to hide from her for
the same reason.
I would have thought I was far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts tortured and unstable, but
I was surprised when I saw Alice bent over the desk, gripping the edge with two hands.
"Alice?"
She didn't react when I called her name, but her head was slowly rocking side to side, and I saw her
face. Her eyes were blank, dazed… My thoughts flew to my mother. Was I already too late?
I hurried to her side, reaching out automatically to touch her hand.
"Alice!" Jasper's voice whipped, and then he was right behind her, his hands curling over hers, loosening
them from their grip on the table. Across the room, the door swung shut with a low click.
"What is it?" he demanded.
She turned her face away from me, into his chest. "Bella," she said.
"I'm right here," I replied.
Her head twisted around, her eyes locking on mine, their expression still strangely blank. I realized at

once that she hadn't been speaking to me, she'd been answering Jasper's question.
"What did you see?" I said — and there was no question in my flat, uncaring voice.
Jasper looked at me sharply. I kept my expression vacant and waited. His eyes were confused as they
flickered swiftly between Alice's face and mine, feeling the chaos… for I could guess what Alice had
seen now.
I felt a tranquil atmosphere settle around me. I welcomed it, using it to keep my emotions disciplined,
under control.
Alice, too, recovered herself.
"Nothing, really," she answered finally, her voice remarkably calm and convincing. "Just the same room
as before."
She finally looked at me, her expression smooth and withdrawn. "Did you want breakfast?"
"No, I'll eat at the airport." I was very calm, too. I went to the bathroom to shower. Almost as if I were
borrowing Jasper's strange extra sense, I could feel Alice's wild — though well-concealed —
desperation to have me out of the room, to be alone with Jasper. So she could tell him that they were
doing something wrong, that they were going to fail…
I got ready methodically, concentrating on each little task. I left my hair down, swirling around me,
covering my face. The peaceful mood Jasper created worked its way through me and helped me think
clearly. Helped me plan. I dug through my bag until I found my sock full of money. I emptied it into my
pocket.
I was anxious to get to the airport, and glad when we left by seven. I sat alone this time in the back of the
dark car. Alice leaned against the door, her face toward Jasper but, behind her sunglasses, shooting
glances in my direction every few seconds.
"Alice?" I asked indifferently.
She was wary. "Yes?"
"How does it work? The things that you see?" I stared out the side window, and my voice sounded
bored. "Edward said it wasn't definite… that things change?" It was harder than I would have thought to
say his name. That must have been what alerted Jasper, why a fresh wave of serenity filled the car.
"Yes, things change…" she murmured — hopefully, I thought. "Some things are more certain than
others… like the weather. People are harder. I only see the course they're on while they're on it. Once
they change their minds — make a new decision, no matter how small — the whole future shifts."
I nodded thoughtfully. "So you couldn't see James in Phoenix until he decided to come here."
"Yes," she agreed, wary again.
And she hadn't seen me in the mirror room with James until I'd made the decision to meet him there. I
tried not to think about what else she might have seen. I didn't want my panic to make Jasper more
suspicious. They would be watching me twice as carefully now, anyway, after Alice's vision. This was
going to be impossible.
We got to the airport. Luck was with me, or maybe it was just good odds. Edward's plane was landing

in terminal four, the largest terminal, where most flights landed — so it wasn't surprising that his was. But
it was the terminal I needed: the biggest, the most confusing. And there was a door on level three that
might be the only chance.
We parked on the fourth floor of the huge garage. I led the way, for once more knowledgeable about my
surroundings than they were. We took the elevator down to level three, where the passengers unloaded.
Alice and Jasper spent a long time looking at the departing flights board. I could hear them discussing the
pros and cons of New York, Atlanta, Chicago. Places I'd never seen. And would never see.
I waited for my opportunity, impatient, unable to stop my toe from tapping. We sat in the long rows of
chairs by the metal detectors, Jasper and Alice pretending to people-watch but really watching me. Every
inch I shifted in my seat was followed by a quick glance out of the corner of their eyes. It was hopeless.
Should I run? Would they dare to stop me physically in this public place? Or would they simply follow?
I pulled the unmarked envelope out of my pocket and set it on top of Alice's black leather bag. She
looked at me.
"My letter," I said. She nodded, tucking it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough.
The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how every cell in my body seemed
to know he was coming, to long for his coming. That made it very hard. I found myself trying to think of
excuses to stay, to see him first and then make my escape. But I knew that was impossible if I was going
to have any chance to get away.
Several times Alice offered to go get breakfast with me. Later, I told her, not yet.
I stared at the arrival board, watching as flight after flight arrived on time. The flight from Seattle crept
closer to the top of the board.
And then, when I had only thirty minutes to make my escape, the numbers changed. His plane was ten
minutes early. I had no more time.
"I think I'll eat now," I said quickly.
Alice stood. "I'll come with you."
"Do you mind if Jasper comes instead?" I asked. "I'm feeling a little…" I didn't finish the sentence. My
eyes were wild enough to convey what I didn't say.
Jasper stood up. Alice's eyes were confused, but — I saw to my relief— not suspicious. She must be
attributing the change in her vision to some maneuver of the tracker's rather than a betrayal by me.
Jasper walked silently beside me, his hand on the small of my back, as if he were guiding me. I pretended
a lack of interest in the first few airport cafes, my head scanning for what I really wanted. And there it
was, around the corner, out of Alice's sharp sight: the level-three ladies' room.
"Do you mind?" I asked Jasper as we passed. "I'll just be a moment."
"I'll be right here," he said.
As soon as the door shut behind me, I was running. I remembered the time I had gotten lost from this
bathroom, because it had two exits.
Outside the far door it was only a short sprint to the elevators, and if Jasper stayed where he said he

would, I'd never be in his line of sight. I didn't look behind me as I ran. This was my only chance, and
even if he saw me, I had to keep going. People stared, but I ignored them. Around the corner the
elevators were waiting, and I dashed forward, throwing my hand between the closing doors of a full
elevator headed down. I squeezed in beside the irritated passengers, and checked to make sure that the
button for level one had been pushed. It was already lit, and the doors closed.
As soon as the door opened I was off again, to the sound of annoyed murmurs behind me. I slowed
myself as I passed the security guards by the luggage carousels, only to break into a run again as the exit
doors came into view. I had no way of knowing if Jasper was looking for me yet.
I would have only seconds if he was following my scent. I jumped out the automatic doors, nearly
smacking into the glass when they opened too slowly.
Along the crowded curb there wasn't a cab in sight.
I had no time. Alice and Jasper were either about to realize I was gone, or they already had. They would
find me in a heartbeat.
A shuttle to the Hyatt was just closing its doors a few feet behind me.
"Wait!" I called, running, waving at the driver.
"This is the shuttle to the Hyatt," the driver said in confusion as he opened the doors.
"Yes," I huffed, "that's where I'm going." I hurried up the steps.
He looked askance at my luggage-less state, but then shrugged, not caring enough to ask.
Most of the seats were empty. I sat as far from the other travelers as possible, and watched out the
window as first the sidewalk, and then the airport, drifted away. I couldn't help imagining Edward, where
he would stand at the edge of the road when he found the end of my trail. I couldn't cry yet, I told myself.
I still had a long way to go.
My luck held. In front of the Hyatt, a tired-looking couple was getting their last suitcase out of the trunk
of a cab. I jumped out of the shuttle and ran to the cab, sliding into the seat behind the driver. The tired
couple and the shuttle driver stared at me.
I told the surprised cabbie my mother's address. "I need to get there as soon as possible."
"That's in Scottsdale," he complained.
I threw four twenties over the seat.
"Will that be enough?"
"Sure, kid, no problem."
I sat back against the seat, folding my arms across my lap. The familiar city began to rush around me, but
I didn't look out the windows. I exerted myself to maintain control. I was determined not to lose myself at
this point, now that my plan was successfully completed. There was no point in indulging in more terror,
more anxiety. My path was set. I just had to follow it now.
So, instead of panicking, I closed my eyes and spent the twenty minutes' drive with Edward.
I imagined that I had stayed at the airport to meet Edward. I visualized how I would stand on my toes,

"Then your boyfriend got on a plane to Phoenix. Victoria was monitoring them for me, naturally; in a
game with this many players, I couldn't be working alone. And so they told me what I'd hoped, that you
were here after all. I was prepared; I'd already been through your charming home movies. And then it
was simply a matter of the bluff.
"Very easy, you know, not really up to my standards. So, you see, I'm hoping you're wrong about your
boyfriend. Edward, isn't it?"
I didn't answer. The bravado was wearing off. I sensed that he was coming to the end of his gloat. It
wasn't meant for me anyway. There was no glory in beating me, a weak human.
"Would you mind, very much, if I left a little letter of my own for your Edward?"
He took a step back and touched a palm-sized digital video camera balanced carefully on top of the
stereo. A small red light indicated that it was already running. He adjusted it a few times, widened the
frame. I stared at him in horror.
"I'm sorry, but I just don't think he'll be able to resist hunting me after he watches this. And I wouldn't
want him to miss anything. It was all for him, of course. You're simply a human, who unfortunately was in
the wrong place, at the wrong time, and indisputably running with the wrong crowd, I might add."
He stepped toward me, smiling. "Before we begin…"
I felt a curl of nausea in the pit of my stomach as he spoke. This was something I had not anticipated.
"I would just like to rub it in, just a little bit. The answer was there all along, and I was so afraid Edward
would see that and ruin my fun. It happened once, oh, ages ago. The one and only time my prey escaped
me.
"You see, the vampire who was so stupidly fond of this little victim made the choice that your Edward
was too weak to make. When the old one knew I was after his little friend, he stole her from the asylum
where he worked — I never will understand the obsession some vampires seem to form with you
humans — and as soon as he freed her he made her safe. She didn't even seem to notice the pain, poor
little creature. She'd been stuck in that black hole of a cell for so long. A hundred years earlier and she
would have been burned at the stake for her visions. In the nineteen-twenties it was the asylum and the
shock treatments. When she opened her eyes, strong with her fresh youth, it was like she'd never seen
the sun before. The old vampire made her a strong new vampire, and there was no reason for me to
touch her then." He sighed. "I destroyed the old one in vengeance."
"Alice," I breathed, astonished.
"Yes, your little friend. I was surprised to see her in the clearing. So I guess her coven ought to be able to
derive some comfort from this experience. I get you, but they get her. The one victim who escaped me,
quite an honor, actually.
"And she did smell so delicious. I still regret that I never got to taste… She smelled even better than you
do. Sorry — I don't mean to be offensive. You have a very nice smell. Floral, somehow…"
He took another step toward me, till he was just inches away. He lifted a lock of my hair and sniffed at it
delicately. Then he gently patted the strand back into place, and I felt his cool fingertips against my throat.
He reached up to stroke my cheek once quickly with his thumb, his face curious. I wanted so badly to
run, but I was frozen. I couldn't even flinch away.
"No," he murmured to himself as he dropped his hand, "I don't understand." He sighed. "Well, I suppose

Someone was burning me.
"Edward." I tried to tell him, but my voice was so heavy and slow. I couldn't understand myself.
"Bella, you're going to be fine. Can you hear me, Bella? I love you."
"Edward," I tried again. My voice was a little clearer.
"Yes, I'm here."
"It hurts," I whimpered.
"I know, Bella, I know" — and then, away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?"
"My bag, please… Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised.
"Alice?" I groaned.
"She's here, she knew where to find you."
"My hand hurts," I tried to tell him.
"I know, Bella. Carlisle will give you something, it will stop."
"My hand is burning!" I screamed, finally breaking through the last of the darkness, my eyes fluttering
open. I couldn't see his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the
fire and put it out?
His voice was frightened. "Bella?"
"The fire! Someone stop the fire!" I screamed as it burned me.
"Carlisle! Her hand!"
"He bit her." Carlisle's voice was no longer calm, it was appalled.
I heard Edward catch his breath in horror.
"Edward, you have to do it." It was Alice's voice, close by my head. Cool fingers brushed at the wetness
in my eyes.
"No!" he bellowed.
"Alice," I moaned.
"There may be a chance," Carlisle said.
"What?" Edward begged.
"See if you can suck the venom back out. The wound is fairly clean." As Carlisle spoke, I could feel
more pressure on my head, something poking and pulling at my scalp. The pain of it was lost in the pain
of the fire.
"Will that work?" Alice's voice was strained.
"I don't know," Carlisle said. "But we have to hurry."

"Carlisle, I…" Edward hesitated. "I don't know if I can do that." There was agony in his beautiful voice
again.
"It's your decision, Edward, either way. I can't help you. I have to get this bleeding stopped here if you're
going to be taking blood from her hand."
I writhed in the grip of the fiery torture, the movement making the pain in my leg flare sickeningly.
"Edward!" I screamed. I realized my eyes were closed again. I opened them, desperate to find his face.
And I found him. Finally, I could see his perfect face, staring at me, twisted into a mask of indecision and
pain.
"Alice, get me something to brace her leg!" Carlisle was bent over me, working on my head. "Edward,
you must do it now, or it will be too late."
Edward's face was drawn. I watched his eyes as the doubt was suddenly replaced with a blazing
determination. His jaw tightened. I felt his cool, strong fingers on my burning hand, locking it in place.
Then his head bent over it, and his cold lips pressed against my skin.
At first the pain was worse. I screamed and thrashed against the cool hands that held me back. I heard
Alice's voice, trying to calm me. Something heavy held my leg to the floor, and Carlisle had my head
locked in the vise of his stone arms.
Then, slowly, my writhing calmed as my hand grew more and more numb. The fire was dulling, focusing
into an ever-smaller point.
I felt my consciousness slipping as the pain subsided. I was afraid to fall into the black waters again,
afraid I would lose him in the darkness.
"Edward," I tried to say, but I couldn't hear my voice. They could hear me.
"He's right here, Bella."
"Stay, Edward, stay with me…"
"I will." His voice was strained, but somehow triumphant.
I sighed contentedly. The fire was gone, the other pains dulled by a sleepiness seeping through my body.
"Is it all out?" Carlisle asked from somewhere far away.
"Her blood tastes clean," Edward said quietly. "I can taste the morphine."
"Bella?" Carlisle called to me.
I tried to answer. "Mmmmm?"
"Is the fire gone?"
"Yes," I sighed. "Thank you, Edward."
"I love you," he answered.
"I know," I breathed, so tired.
I heard my favorite sound in the world: Edward's quiet laugh, weak with relief.

"Bella?" Carlisle asked again.
I frowned; I wanted to sleep. "What?"
"Where is your mother?"
"In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was
pitifully frail.
But that reminded me.
"Alice." I tried to open my eyes. "Alice, the video — he knew you, Alice, he knew where you came
from." I meant to speak urgently, but my voice was feeble. "I smell gasoline," I added, surprised through
the haze in my brain.
"It's time to move her," Carlisle said.
"No, I want to sleep," I complained.
"You can sleep, sweetheart, I'll carry you," Edward soothed me.
And I was in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone.
"Sleep now, Bella" were the last words I heard.

"Alice called them. Renée is here — well, here in the hospital. She's getting something to eat right now."
"She's here?" I tried to sit up, but the spinning in my head accelerated, and his hand pushed me gently
down onto the pillows.
"She'll be back soon," he promised. "And you need to stay still."
"But what did you tell her?" I panicked. I had no interest in being soothed. My mom was here and I was
recovering from a vampire attack. "Why did you tell her I'm here?"
"You fell down two flights of stairs and through a window." He paused. "You have to admit, it could
happen."
I sighed, and it hurt. I stared down at my body under the sheet, the huge lump that was my leg.
"How bad am I?" I asked.
"You have a broken leg, four broken ribs, some cracks in your skull, bruises covering every inch of your
skin, and you've lost a lot of blood. They gave you a few transfusions. I didn't like it — it made you smell
all wrong for a while."
"That must have been a nice change for you."
"No, I like how you smell."
"How did you do it?" I asked quietly. He knew what I meant at once.
"I'm not sure." He looked away from my wondering eyes, lifting my gauze-wrapped hand from the bed
and holding it gently in his, careful not to disrupt the wire connecting me to one of the monitors.
I waited patiently for the rest.
He sighed without returning my gaze. "It was impossible… to stop," he whispered. "Impossible. But I
did." He looked up finally, with half a smile. "I must love you."
"Don't I taste as good as I smell?" I smiled in response. That hurt my face.
"Even better — better than I'd imagined."
"I'm sorry," I apologized.
He raised his eyes to the ceiling. "Of all the things to apologize for."
"What should I apologize for?"
"For very nearly taking yourself away from me forever."
"I'm sorry," I apologized again.
"I know why you did it." His voice was comforting. "It was still irrational, of course. You should have
waited for me, you should have told me."
"You wouldn't have let me go."
"No," he agreed in a grim tone, "I wouldn't."

Some very unpleasant memories were beginning to come back to me. I shuddered, and then winced.
He was instantly anxious. "Bella, what's wrong?"
"What happened to James?"
"After I pulled him off you, Emmett and Jasper took care of him." There was a fierce note of regret in his
voice.
This confused me. "I didn't see Emmett and Jasper there."
"They had to leave the room… there was a lot of blood."
"But you stayed."
"Yes, I stayed."
"And Alice, and Carlisle…" I said in wonder.
"They love you, too, you know."
A flash of painful images from the last time I'd seen Alice reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the
tape?" I asked anxiously.
"Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred.
"She was always in the dark, that's why she didn't remember."
"I know. She understands now." His voice was even, but his face was black with fury.
I tried to reach his face with my free hand, but something stopped me. I glanced down to see the IV
pulling at my hand.
"Ugh." I winced.
"What is it?" he asked anxiously — distracted, but not enough. The bleakness did not entirely leave his
eyes.
"Needles," I explained, looking away from the one in my hand. I concentrated on a warped ceiling tile
and tried to breathe deeply despite the ache in my ribs.
"Afraid of a needle," he muttered to himself under his breath, shaking his head. "Oh, a sadistic vampire,
intent on torturing her to death, sure, no problem, she runs off to meet him. An IV, on the other hand…"
I rolled my eyes. I was pleased to discover that this reaction, at least, was pain-free. I decided to change
the subject.
"Why are you here?" I asked.
He stared at me, first confusion and then hurt touching his eyes. His brows pulled together as he frowned.
"Do you want me to leave?"
"No!" I protested, horrified by the thought. "No, I meant, why does my mother think you're here? I need
to have my story straight before she gets back."
"Oh," he said, and his forehead smoothed back into marble. "I came to Phoenix to talk some sense into

you, to convince you to come back to Forks." His wide eyes were so earnest and sincere, I almost
believed him myself. "You agreed to see me, and you drove out to the hotel where I was staying with
Carlisle and Alice — of course I was here with parental supervision," he inserted virtuously, "but you
tripped on the stairs on the way to my room and… well, you know the rest. You don't need to remember
any details, though; you have a good excuse to be a little muddled about the finer points."
I thought about it for a moment. "There are a few flaws with that story. Like no broken windows."
"Not really," he said. "Alice had a little bit too much fun fabricating evidence. It's all been taken care of
very convincingly — you could probably sue the hotel if you wanted to. You have nothing to worry
about," he promised, stroking my cheek with the lightest of touches. "Your only job now is to heal."
I wasn't so lost to the soreness or the fog of medication that I didn't respond to his touch. The beeping of
the monitor jumped around erratically — now he wasn't the only one who could hear my heart
misbehave.
"That's going to be embarrassing," I muttered to myself.
He chuckled, and a speculative look came into his eye. "Hmm, I wonder…"
He leaned in slowly; the beeping noise accelerated wildly before his lips even touched me. But when they
did, though with the most gentle of pressure, the beeping stopped altogether.
He pulled back abruptly, his anxious expression turning to relief as the monitor reported the restarting of
my heart.
"It seems that I'm going to have to be even more careful with you than usual." He frowned.
"I was not finished kissing you," I complained. "Don't make me come over there."
He grinned, and bent to press his lips lightly to mine. The monitor went wild.
But then his lips were taut. He pulled away.
"I think I hear your mother," he said, grinning again.
"Don't leave me," I cried, an irrational surge of panic flooding through me. I couldn't let him go — he
might disappear from me again.
He read the terror in my eyes for a short second. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he smiled.
"I'll take a nap."
He moved from the hard plastic chair by my side to the turquoise faux-leather recliner at the foot of my
bed, leaning it all the way back, and closing his eyes. He was perfectly still.
"Don't forget to breathe," I whispered sarcastically. He took a deep breath, his eyes still closed.
I could hear my mother now. She was talking to someone, maybe a nurse, and she sounded tired and
upset. I wanted to jump out of the bed and run to her, to calm her, promise that everything was fine. But
I wasn't in any sort of shape for jumping, so I waited impatiently.
The door opened a crack, and she peeked through.
"Mom!" I whispered, my voice full of love and relief.

She took in Edward's still form on the recliner, and tiptoed to my bedside.
"He never leaves, does he?" she mumbled to herself.
"Mom, I'm so glad to see you!"
She bent down to hug me gently, and I felt warm tears falling on my cheeks.
"Bella, I was so upset!"
"I'm sorry, Mom. But everything's fine now, it's okay," I comforted her.
"I'm just glad to finally see your eyes open." She sat on the edge of my bed.
I suddenly realized I didn't have any idea when it was. "How long have they been closed?"
"It's Friday, hon, you've been out for a while."
"Friday?" I was shocked. I tried to remember what day it had been when… but I didn't want to think
about that.
"They had to keep you sedated for a while, honey — you've got a lot of injuries."
"I know." I could feel them.
"You're lucky Dr. Cullen was there. He's such a nice man… very young, though. And he looks more like
a model than a doctor…"
"You met Carlisle?"
"And Edward's sister Alice. She's a lovely girl."
"She is," I agreed wholeheartedly.
She glanced over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes closed in the chair. "You didn't tell me you
had such good friends in Forks."
I cringed, and then moaned.
"What hurts?" she demanded anxiously, turning back to me. Edward's eyes flashed to my face.
"It's fine," I assured them. "I just have to remember not to move." He lapsed back into his phony slumber.
I took advantage of my mother's momentary distraction to keep the subject from returning to my
less-than-candid behavior. "Where's Phil?" I asked quickly.
"Florida — oh, Bella! You'll never guess! Just when we were about to leave, the best news!"
"Phil got signed?" I guessed.
"Yes! How did you guess! The Suns, can you believe it?"
"That's great, Mom," I said as enthusiastically as I could manage, though I had little idea what that meant.
"And you'll like Jacksonville so much," she gushed while I stared at her vacantly. "I was a little bit worried
when Phil started talking about Akron, what with the snow and everything, because you know how I hate

know why," I demanded.
"Why?" he repeated warily.
"Why you did it. Why didn't you just let the venom spread? By now I would be just like you."
Edward's eyes seemed to turn flat black, and I remembered that this was something he'd never intended
me to know. Alice must have been preoccupied by the things she'd learned about herself… or she'd been
very careful with her thoughts around him — clearly, he'd had no idea that she'd filled me in on the
mechanics of vampire conversions. He was surprised, and infuriated. His nostrils flared, his mouth looked
as if it was chiseled from stone.
He wasn't going to answer, that much was clear.
"I'll be the first to admit that I have no experience with relationships," I said. "But it just seems logical… a
man and woman have to be somewhat equal… as in, one of them can't always be swooping in and
saving the other one. They have to save each other equally."
He folded his arms on the side of my bed and rested his chin on his arms. His expression was smooth,
the anger reined in. Evidently he'd decided he wasn't angry with me. I hoped I'd get a chance to warn
Alice before he caught up with her.
"You have saved me," he said quietly.
"I can't always be Lois Lane," I insisted. "I want to be Superman, too."
"You don't know what you're asking." His voice was soft; he stared intently at the edge of the pillowcase.
"I think I do."
"Bella, you don't know. I've had almost ninety years to think about this, and I'm still not sure."
"Do you wish that Carlisle hadn't saved you?"
"No, I don't wish that." He paused before continuing. "But my life was over. I wasn't giving anything up."
"You are my life. You're the only thing it would hurt me to lose." I was getting better at this. It was easy
to admit how much I needed him.
He was very calm, though. Decided.
"I can't do it, Bella. I won't do that to you."
"Why not?" My throat rasped and the words weren't as loud as I'd meant them to be. "Don't tell me it's
too hard! After today, or I guess it was a few days ago… anyway, after that, it should be nothing."
He glared at me.
"And the pain?" he asked.
I blanched. I couldn't help it. But I tried to keep my expression from showing how clearly I remembered
the feeling… the fire in my veins.
"That's my problem," I said. "I can handle it."
"It's possible to take bravery to the point where it becomes insanity."

"It's not an issue. Three days. Big deal."
Edward grimaced again as my words reminded him that I was more informed than he had ever intended
me to be. I watched him repress the anger, watched as his eyes grew speculative.
"Charlie?" he asked curtly. "Renée?"
Minutes passed in silence as I struggled to answer his question. I opened my mouth, but no sound came
out. I closed it again. He waited, and his expression became triumphant because he knew I had no true
answer.
"Look, that's not an issue either," I finally muttered; my voice was as unconvincing as it always was when
I lied. "Renée has always made the choices that work for her — she'd want me to do the same. And
Charlie's resilient, he's used to being on his own. I can't take care of them forever. I have my own life to
live."
"Exactly," he snapped. "And I won't end it for you."
"If you're waiting for me to be on my deathbed, I've got news for you! I was just there!"
"You're going to recover," he reminded me.
I took a deep breath to calm myself, ignoring the spasm of pain it triggered. I stared at him, and he stared
back. There was no compromise in his face.
"No," I said slowly. "I'm not."
His forehead creased. "Of course you are. You may have a scar or two…"
"You're wrong," I insisted. "I'm going to die."
"Really, Bella." He was anxious now. "You'll be out of here in a few days. Two week at most."
I glared at him. "I may not die now… but I'm going to die sometime. Every minute of the day, I get
closer. And I'm going to get old."
He frowned as what I was saying sunk in, pressing his long fingers to his temples and closing his eyes.
"That's how it's supposed to happen. How it should happen. How it would have happened if I didn't exist
— and I shouldn't exist."
I snorted. He opened his eyes in surprise. "That's stupid. That's like going to someone who's just won the
lottery, taking their money, and saying, "Look, let's just go back to how things should be. It's better that
way." And I'm not buying it."
"I'm hardly a lottery prize," he growled.
"That's right. You're much better."
He rolled his eyes and set his lips. "Bella, we're not having this discussion anymore. I refuse to damn you
to an eternity of night and that's the end of it."
"If you think that's the end, then you don't know me very well," I warned him. "You're not the only
vampire I know."
His eyes went black again. "Alice wouldn't dare."

And for a moment he looked so frightening that I couldn't help but believe it — I couldn't imagine
someone brave enough to cross him.
"Alice already saw it, didn't she?" I guessed. "That's why the things she says upset you. She knows I'm
going to be like you… someday."
"She's wrong. She also saw you dead, but that didn't happen, either."
"You'll never catch me betting against Alice."
We stared at each other for a very long time. It was quiet except for the whirring of the machines, the
beeping, the dripping, the ticking of the big clock on the wall. Finally, his expression softened.
"So where does that leave us?" I wondered.
He chuckled humorlessly. "I believe it's called an impasse."
I sighed. "Ouch," I muttered.
"How are you feeling?" he asked, eyeing the button for the nurse.
"I'm fine," I lied.
"I don't believe you," he said gently.
"I'm not going back to sleep."
"You need rest. All this arguing isn't good for you."
"So give in," I hinted.
"Nice try." He reached for the button.
"No!"
He ignored me.
"Yes?" the speaker on the wall squawked.
"I think we're ready for more pain medication," he said calmly, ignoring my furious expression.
"I'll send in the nurse." The voice sounded very bored.
"I won't take it," I promised.
He looked toward the sack of fluids hanging beside my bed. "I don't think they're going to ask you to
swallow anything."
My heart rate started to climb. He read the fear in my eyes, and sighed in frustration.
"Bella, you're in pain. You need to relax so you can heal. Why are you being so difficult? They're not
going to put any more needles in you now."
"I'm not afraid of the needles," I mumbled. "I'm afraid to close my eyes."
Then he smiled his crooked smile, and took my face between his hands. "I told you I'm not going

I wanted to tell him.
"Edward?" I struggled to pronounce his name clearly.
"Yes?"
"I'm betting on Alice," I mumbled.
And then the night closed over me.

Edward helped me into his car, being very careful of the wisps of silk and chiffon, the flowers he'd just
pinned into my elaborately styled curls, and my bulky walking cast. He ignored the angry set of my
mouth.
When he had me settled, he got in the driver's seat and headed back out the long, narrow drive.
"At what point exactly are you going to tell me what's going on?" I asked grumpily. I really hated
surprises. And he knew that.
"I'm shocked that you haven't figured it out yet." He threw a mocking smile in my direction, and my
breath caught in my throat. Would I ever get used to his perfection?
"I did mention that you looked very nice, didn't I?" I verified.
"Yes." He grinned again. I'd never seen him dress in black before, and, with the contrast against his pale
skin, his beauty was absolutely surreal. That much I couldn't deny, even if the fact that he was wearing a
tuxedo made me very nervous.
Not quite as nervous as the dress. Or the shoe. Only one shoe, as my other foot was still securely
encased in plaster. But the stiletto heel, held on only by satin ribbons, certainly wasn't going to help me as
I tried to hobble around.
"I'm not coming over anymore if Alice is going to treat me like Guinea Pig Barbie when I do," I griped.
I'd spent the better part of the day in Alice's staggeringly vast bathroom, a helpless victim as she played
hairdresser and cosmetician. Whenever I fidgeted or complained, she reminded me that she didn't have
any memories of being human, and asked me not to ruin her vicarious fun. Then she'd dressed me in the
most ridiculous dress — deep blue, frilly and off the shoulders, with French tags I couldn't read — a
dress more suitable for a runway than Forks. Nothing good could come of our formal attire, of that I was
sure. Unless… but I was afraid to put my suspicions into words, even in my own head.
I was distracted then by the sound of a phone ringing. Edward pulled his cell phone from a pocket inside
his jacket, looking briefly at the caller ID before answering.
"Hello, Charlie," he said warily.
"Charlie?" I frowned.
Charlie had been… difficult since my return to Forks. He had compartmentalized my bad experience into
two defined reactions. Toward Carlisle he was almost worshipfully grateful. On the other hand, he was

stubbornly convinced that Edward was at fault — because, if not for him, I wouldn't have left home in the
first place. And Edward was far from disagreeing with him. These days I had rules that hadn't existed
before: curfews… visiting hours.
Something Charlie was saying made Edward's eyes widen in disbelief, and then a grin spread across his
face.
"You're kidding!" He laughed.
"What is it?" I demanded.
He ignored me. "Why don't you let me talk to him?" Edward suggested with evident pleasure. He waited
for a few seconds.
"Hello, Tyler, this is Edward Cullen." His voice was very friendly, on the surface. I knew it well enough to
catch the soft edge of menace. What was Tyler doing at my house? The awful truth began to dawn on
me. I looked again at the inappropriate dress Alice had forced me into.
"I'm sorry if there's been some kind of miscommunication, but Bella is unavailable tonight." Edward's tone
changed, and the threat in his voice was suddenly much more evident as he continued. "To be perfectly
honest, she'll be unavailable every night, as far as anyone besides myself is concerned. No offense. And
I'm sorry about your evening." He didn't sound sorry at all. And then he snapped the phone shut, a huge
smirk on his face.
My face and neck flushed crimson with anger. I could feel the rage-induced tears starting to fill my eyes.
He looked at me in surprise. "Was that last part a bit too much? I didn't mean to offend you."
I ignored that.
"You're taking me to the prom!" I yelled.
It was embarrassingly obvious now. If I'd been paying any attention at all, I'm sure I would have noticed
the date on the posters that decorated the school buildings. But I'd never dreamed he was thinking of
subjecting me to this. Didn't he know me at all?
He wasn't expecting the force of my reaction, that was clear. He pressed his lips together and his eyes
narrowed. "Don't be difficult, Bella."
My eyes flashed to the window; we were halfway to the school already.
"Why are you doing this to me?" I demanded in horror.
He gestured to his tuxedo. "Honestly, Bella, what did you think we were doing?"
I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions —
expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a beauty queen,
were so far wide of the mark. My half-fearful hopes seemed very silly now.
I'd guessed there was some kind of occasion brewing. But prom! That was the furthest thing from my
mind.
The angry tears rolled over my cheeks. I remembered with dismay that I was very uncharacteristically
wearing mascara. I wiped quickly under my eyes to prevent any smudges. My hand was unblackened
when I pulled it away; maybe Alice had known I would need waterproof makeup.

"This is completely ridiculous. Why are you crying?" he demanded in frustration.
"Because I'm mad!"
"Bella." He turned the full force of his scorching golden eyes on me.
"What?" I muttered, distracted.
"Humor me," he insisted.
His eyes were melting all my fury. It was impossible to fight with him when he cheated like that. I gave in
with poor grace.
"Fine," I pouted, unable to glare as effectively as I would have liked. "I'll go quietly. But you'll see. I'm
way overdue for more bad luck. I'll probably break my other leg. Look at this shoe! It's a death trap!" I
held out my good leg as evidence.
"Hmmm." He stared at my leg longer than was necessary. "Remind me to thank Alice for that tonight."
"Alice is going to be there?" That comforted me slightly.
"With Jasper, and Emmett… and Rosalie," he admitted.
The feeling of comfort disappeared. There had been no progress with Rosalie, though I was on quite
good terms with her sometimes-husband. Emmett enjoyed having me around — he thought my bizarre
human reactions were hilarious… or maybe it was just the fact that I fell down a lot that he found so
funny. Rosalie acted as if I didn't exist. While I shook my head to dispel the direction my thoughts had
taken, I thought of something else.
"Is Charlie in on this?" I asked, suddenly suspicious.
"Of course." He grinned, and then chuckled. "Apparently Tyler wasn't, though."
I gritted my teeth. How Tyler could be so delusional, I couldn't imagine. At school, where Charlie
couldn't interfere, Edward and I were inseparable — except for those rare sunny days.
We were at the school now; Rosalie's red convertible was conspicuous in the parking lot. The clouds
were thin today, a few streaks of sunlight escaping through far away in the west.
He got out and walked around the car to open my door. He held out his hand.
I sat stubbornly in my seat, arms folded, feeling a secret twinge of smugness. The lot was crowded with
people in formal dress: witnesses. He couldn't remove me forcibly from the car as he might have if we'd
been alone.
He sighed. "When someone wants to kill you, you're brave as a lion — and then when someone mentions
dancing…" He shook his head.
I gulped. Dancing.
"Bella, I won't let anything hurt you — not even yourself. I won't let go of you once, I promise."
I thought about that and suddenly felt much better. He could see that in my face.
"There, now," he said gently, "it won't be so bad." He leaned down and wrapped one arm around my

waist. I took his other hand and let him lift me from the car.
He kept his arm tightly around me, supporting me as I limped toward the school.
In Phoenix, they held proms in hotel ballrooms. This dance was in the gym, of course. It was probably
the only room in town big enough for a dance. When we got inside, I giggled. There were actual balloon
arches and twisted garlands of pastel crepe paper festooning the walls.
"This looks like a horror movie waiting to happen," I snickered.
"Well," he muttered as we slowly approached the ticket table — he was carrying most of my weight, but
I still had to shuffle and wobble my feet forward — "there are more than enough vampires present."
I looked at the dance floor; a wide gap had formed in the center of the floor, where two couples whirled
gracefully. The other dancers pressed to the sides of the room to give them space — no one wanted to
stand in contrast with such radiance. Emmett and Jasper were intimidating and flawless in classic tuxedos.
Alice was striking in a black satin dress with geometric cutouts that bared large triangles of her snowy
white skin. And Rosalie was… well, Rosalie. She was beyond belief. Her vivid scarlet dress was
backless, tight to her calves where it flared into a wide ruffled train, with a neckline that plunged to her
waist. I pitied every girl in the room, myself included.
"Do you want me to bolt the doors so you can massacre the unsuspecting townsfolk?" I whispered
conspiratorially.
"And where do you fit into that scheme?" He glared.
"Oh, I'm with the vampires, of course."
He smiled reluctantly. "Anything to get out of dancing."
"Anything."
He bought our tickets, then turned me toward the dance floor. I cringed against his arm and dragged my
feet.
"I've got all night," he warned.
Eventually he towed me out to where his family was twirling elegantly — if in a style totally unsuitable to
the present time and music. I watched in horror.
"Edward." My throat was so dry I could only manage a whisper. "I honestly can't dance!" I could feel
the panic bubbling up inside my chest.
"Don't worry, silly," he whispered back. "I can." He put my arms around his neck and lifted me to slide
his feet under mine.
And then we were whirling, too.
"I feel like I'm five years old," I laughed after a few minutes of effortless waltzing.
"You don't look five," he murmured, pulling me closer for a second, so that my feet were briefly a foot
from the ground.
Alice caught my eye on a turn and smiled in encouragement — I smiled back. I was surprised to realize
that I was actually enjoying myself… a little.

