My mother drove me to the airport with the windows rolled down. It was seventy-five degrees in
Phoenix, the sky a perfect, cloudless blue. I was wearing my favorite shirt — sleeveless, white eyelet
lace; I was wearing it as a farewell gesture. My carry-on item was a parka.
In the Olympic Peninsula of northwest Washington State, a small town named Forks exists under a
near-constant cover of clouds. It rains on this inconsequential town more than any other place in the
United States of America. It was from this town and its gloomy, omnipresent shade that my mother
escaped with me when I was only a few months old. It was in this town that I'd been compelled to spend
a month every summer until I was fourteen. That was the year I finally put my foot down; these past three
summers, my dad, Charlie, vacationed with me in California for two weeks instead.
It was to Forks that I now exiled myself— an action that I took with great horror. I detested Forks.
I loved Phoenix. I loved the sun and the blistering heat. I loved the vigorous, sprawling city.
"Bella," my mom said to me — the last of a thousand times — before I got on the plane. "You don't have
to do this."
My mom looks like me, except with short hair and laugh lines. I felt a spasm of panic as I stared at her
wide, childlike eyes. How could I leave my loving, erratic, harebrained mother to fend for herself? Of
course she had Phil now, so the bills would probably get paid, there would be food in the refrigerator,
gas in her car, and someone to call when she got lost, but still…
"I want to go," I lied. I'd always been a bad liar, but I'd been saying this lie so frequently lately that it
sounded almost convincing now.
"Tell Charlie I said hi."
"I will."
"I'll see you soon," she insisted. "You can come home whenever you want — I'll come right back as soon
as you need me."
But I could see the sacrifice in her eyes behind the promise.
"Don't worry about me," I urged. "It'll be great. I love you, Mom."

wouldn't ask.
"Well, Billy's done a lot of work on the engine — it's only a few years old, really."
I hoped he didn't think so little of me as to believe I would give up that easily. "When did he buy it?"
"He bought it in 1984, I think."
"Did he buy it new?"
"Well, no. I think it was new in the early sixties — or late fifties at the earliest," he admitted sheepishly.
"Ch — Dad, I don't really know anything about cars. I wouldn't be able to fix it if anything went wrong,
and I couldn't afford a mechanic…"
"Really, Bella, the thing runs great. They don't build them like that anymore."
The thing, I thought to myself… it had possibilities — as a nickname, at the very least.
"How cheap is cheap?" After all, that was the part I couldn't compromise on.
"Well, honey, I kind of already bought it for you. As a homecoming gift." Charlie peeked sideways at me
with a hopeful expression.
Wow. Free.
"You didn't need to do that, Dad. I was going to buy myself a car."
"I don't mind. I want you to be happy here." He was looking ahead at the road when he said this. Charlie
wasn't comfortable with expressing his emotions out loud. I inherited that from him. So I was looking
straight ahead as I responded.
"That's really nice, Dad. Thanks. I really appreciate it." No need to add that my being happy in Forks is
an impossibility. He didn't need to suffer along with me. And I never looked a free truck in the mouth —
or engine.
"Well, now, you're welcome," he mumbled, embarrassed by my thanks.
We exchanged a few more comments on the weather, which was wet, and that was pretty much it for
Conversation. We stared out the windows in silence.
It was beautiful, of course; I couldn't deny that. Everything was green: the trees, their trunks covered with
moss, their branches hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with ferns. Even the air filtered
down greenly through the leaves.
It was too green — an alien planet.
Eventually we made it to Charlie's. He still lived in the small, two-bedroom house that he'd bought with
my mother in the early days of their marriage. Those were the only kind of days their marriage had — the
early ones. There, parked on the street in front of the house that never changed, was my new — well,
new to me — truck. It was a faded red color, with big, rounded fenders and a bulbous cab. To my
intense surprise, I loved it. I didn't know if it would run, but I could see myself in it. Plus, it was one of
those solid iron affairs that never gets damaged — the kind you see at the scene of an accident, paint
unscratched, surrounded by the pieces of the foreign car it had destroyed.

"You're Isabella Swan, aren't you?" He looked like the overly helpful, chess club type.
"Bella," I corrected. Everyone within a three-seat radius turned to look at me.
"Where's your next class?" he asked.
I had to check in my bag. "Um, Government, with Jefferson, in building six."
There was nowhere to look without meeting curious eyes.
"I'm headed toward building four, I could show you the way…" Definitely over-helpful. "I'm Eric," he
added.
I smiled tentatively. "Thanks."
We got our jackets and headed out into the rain, which had picked up. I could have sworn several
people behind us were walking close enough to eavesdrop. I hoped I wasn't getting paranoid.
"So, this is a lot different than Phoenix, huh?" he asked.
"Very."
"It doesn't rain much there, does it?"
"Three or four times a year."
"Wow, what must that be like?" he wondered.
"Sunny," I told him.
"You don't look very tan."
"My mother is part albino."
He studied my face apprehensively, and I sighed. It looked like clouds and a sense of humor didn't mix.
A few months of this and I'd forget how to use sarcasm.
We walked back around the cafeteria, to the south buildings by the gym. Eric walked me right to the
door, though it was clearly marked.
"Well, good luck," he said as I touched the handle. "Maybe we'll have some other classes together." He
sounded hopeful.
I smiled at him vaguely and went inside.
The rest of the morning passed in about the same fashion. My Trigonometry teacher, Mr. Varner, who I
would have hated anyway just because of the subject he taught, was the only one who made me stand in
front of the class and introduce myself. I stammered, blushed, and tripped over my own boots on the
way to my seat.
After two classes, I started to recognize several of the faces in each class. There was always someone
braver than the others who would introduce themselves and ask me questions about how I was liking
Forks. I tried to be diplomatic, but mostly I just lied a lot. At least I never needed the map.
One girl sat next to me in both Trig and Spanish, and she walked with me to the cafeteria for lunch. She
was tiny, several inches shorter than my five feet four inches, but her wildly curly dark hair made up a lot

and his forearm was surprisingly hard and muscular beneath his light skin. He wasn't nearly as slight as
he'd looked next to his burly brother.
The class seemed to drag on longer than the others. Was it because the day was finally coming to a
close, or because I was waiting for his tight fist to loosen? It never did; he continued to sit so still it
looked like he wasn't breathing. What was wrong with him? Was this his normal behavior? I questioned
my judgment on Jessica's bitterness at lunch today. Maybe she was not as resentful as I'd thought.
It couldn't have anything to do with me. He didn't know me from Eve.
I peeked up at him one more time, and regretted it. He was glaring down at me again, his black eyes full
of revulsion. As I flinched away from him, shrinking against my chair, the phrase if looks could kill
suddenly ran through my mind.
At that moment, the bell rang loudly, making me jump, and Edward Cullen was out of his seat. Fluidly he
rose — he was much taller than I'd thought — his back to me, and he was out the door before anyone
else was out of their seat.
I sat frozen in my seat, staring blankly after him. He was so mean. It wasn't fair. I began gathering up my
things slowly, trying to block the anger that filled me, for fear my eyes would tear up. For some reason,
my temper was hardwired to my tear ducts. I usually cried when I was angry, a humiliating tendency.
"Aren't you Isabella Swan?" a male voice asked.
I looked up to see a cute, baby-faced boy, his pale blond hair carefully gelled into orderly spikes, smiling
at me in a friendly way. He obviously didn't think I smelled bad.
"Bella," I corrected him, with a smile.
"I'm Mike."
"Hi, Mike."
"Do you need any help finding your next class?"
"I'm headed to the gym, actually. I think I can find it."
"That's my next class, too." He seemed thrilled, though it wasn't that big of a coincidence in a school this
small.
We walked to class together; he was a chatterer — he supplied most of the conversation, which made it
easy for me. He'd lived in California till he was ten, so he knew how I felt about the sun. It turned out he
was in my English class also. He was the nicest person I'd met today.
But as we were entering the gym, he asked, "So, did you stab Edward Cullen with a pencil or what? I've
never seen him act like that."
I cringed. So I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn't Edward Cullen's usual
behavior. I decided to play dumb.
"Was that the boy I sat next to in Biology?" I asked artlessly.
"Yes," he said. "He looked like he was in pain or something."
"I don't know," I responded. "I never spoke to him."

that I be assigned kitchen detail for the duration of my stay. He was willing enough to hand over the keys
to the banquet hall. I also found out that he had no food in the house. So I had my shopping list and the
cash from the jar in the cupboard labeled FOOD MONEY, and I was on my way to the Thriftway.
I gunned my deafening engine to life, ignoring the heads that turned in my direction, and backed carefully
into a place in the line of cars that were waiting to exit the parking lot. As I waited, trying to pretend that
the earsplitting rumble was coming from someone else's car, I saw the two Cullens and the Hale twins
getting into their car. It was the shiny new Volvo. Of course. I hadn't noticed their clothes before — I'd
been too mesmerized by their faces. Now that I looked, it was obvious that they were all dressed
exceptionally well; simply, but in clothes that subtly hinted at designer origins. With their remarkable good
looks, the style with which they carried themselves, they could have worn dishrags and pulled it off. It
seemed excessive for them to have both looks and money. But as far as I could tell, life worked that way
most of the time. It didn't look as if it bought them any acceptance here.
No, I didn't fully believe that. The isolation must be their desire; I couldn't imagine any door that wouldn't
be opened by that degree of beauty.
They looked at my noisy truck as I passed them, just like everyone else. I kept my eyes straight forward
and was relieved when I finally was free of the school grounds.
The Thriftway was not far from the school, just a few streets south, off the highway. It was nice to be
inside the supermarket; it felt normal. I did the shopping at home, and I fell into the pattern of the familiar
task gladly. The store was big enough inside that I couldn't hear the tapping of the rain on the roof to
remind me where I was.
When I got home, I unloaded all the groceries, stuffing them in wherever I could find an open space. I
hoped Charlie wouldn't mind. I wrapped potatoes in foil and stuck them in the oven to bake, covered a
steak in marinade and balanced it on top of a carton of eggs in the fridge.
When I was finished with that, I took my book bag upstairs. Before starting my homework, I changed
into a pair of dry sweats, pulled my damp hair up into a pony-tail, and checked my e-mail for the first
time. I had three messages.
"Bella," my mom wrote…

I sighed and went to the next. It was sent eight hours after the first.
"Bella," she wrote…

Mom,
Calm down. I'm writing right now. Don't do anything rash.
Bella.

Mom,
Everything is great. Of course it's raining. I was waiting for something to write about. School
isn't bad, just a little repetitive. I met some nice kids who sit by me at lunch.
Your blouse is at the dry cleaners - you were supposed to pick it up Friday.
Charlie bought me a truck, can you believe it? I love it. It's old, but really sturdy, which is
good, you know, for me.
I miss you, too. I'll write again soon, but I'm not going to check my e-mail every five minutes.
Relax, breathe. I love you.
Bella.

I had decided to read Wuthering Heights — the novel we were currently studying in English — yet
again for the fun of it, and that's what I was doing when Charlie came home. I'd lost track of the time,
and I hurried downstairs to take the potatoes out and put the steak in to broil.
"Bella?" my father called out when he heard me on the stairs.
Who else? I thought to myself.
"Hey, Dad, welcome home."
"Thanks." He hung up his gun belt and stepped out of his boots as I bustled about the kitchen. As far as I
was aware, he'd never shot the gun on the job. But he kept it ready. When I came here as a child, he
would always remove the bullets as soon as he walked in the door. I guess he considered me old enough
now not to shoot myself by accident, and not depressed enough to shoot myself on purpose.
"What's for dinner?" he asked warily. My mother was an imaginative cook, and her experiments weren't

turned to see where it came from. I had my suspicions about Eric, who was walking away, his back
toward us — in the wrong direction for his next class. Mike appatently had the same notion. He bent
over and began scraping together a pile of the white mush.
"I'll see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. "Once people start throwing wet stuff, I go
inside."
He just nodded, his eyes on Eric's retreating figure.
Throughout the morning, everyone chattered excitedly about the snow; apparently it was the first snowfall
of the new year. I kept my mouth shut. Sure, it was drier than rain — until it melted in your socks.
I walked alertly to the cafeteria with Jessica after Spanish. Mush balls were flying everywhere. I kept a
binder in my hands, ready to use it as a shield if necessary. Jessica thought I was hilarious, but something
in my expression kept her from lobbing a snowball at me herself.
Mike caught up to us as we walked in the doors, laughing, with ice melting the spikes in his hair. He and
Jessica were talking animatedly about the snow fight as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that
table in the corner out of habit. And then I froze where I stood. There were five people at the table.
Jessica pulled on my arm.
"Hello? Bella? What do you want?"
I looked down; my ears were hot. I had no reason to feel self-conscious, I reminded myself. I hadn't
done anything wrong.
"What's with Bella?" Mike asked Jessica.
"Nothing," I answered. "I'll just get a soda today." I caught up to the end of the line.
"Aren't you hungry?" Jessica asked.
"Actually, I feel a little sick," I said, my eyes still on the floor.
I waited for them to get their food, and then followed them to a table, my eyes on my feet.
I sipped my soda slowly, my stomach churning. Twice Mike asked, with unnecessary concern, how I
was feeling.
I told him it was nothing, but I was wondering if I should play it up and escape to the nurse's office for
the next hour.
Ridiculous. I shouldn't have to run away.
I decided to permit myself one glance at the Cullen family's table. If he was glaring at me, I would skip
Biology, like the coward I was.
I kept my head down and glanced up under my lashes. None of them were looking this way. I lifted my
head a little.
They were laughing. Edward, Jasper, and Emmett all had their hair entirely saturated with melting snow.
Alice and Rosalie were leaning away as Emmett shook his dripping hair toward them. They were
enjoying the snowy day, just like everyone else — only they looked more like a scene from a movie than
the rest of us.

But, aside from the laughter and playfulness, there was something different, and I couldn't quite pinpoint
what that difference was. I examined Edward the most carefully. His skin was less pale, I decided —
flushed from the snow fight maybe — the circles under his eyes much less noticeable. But there was
something more. I pondered, staring, trying to isolate the change.
"Bella, what are you staring at?" Jessica intruded, her eyes following my stare.
At that precise moment, his eyes flashed over to meet mine.
I dropped my head, letting my hair fall to conceal my face. I was sure, though, in the instant our eyes met,
that he didn't look harsh or unfriendly as he had the last time I'd seen him. He looked merely curious
again, unsatisfied in some way.
"Edward Cullen is staring at you," Jessica giggled in my ear.
"He doesn't look angry, does he?" I couldn't help asking.
"No," she said, sounding confused by my question. "Should he be?"
"I don't think he likes me," I confided. I still felt queasy. I put my head down on my arm.
"The Cullens don't like anybody… well, they don't notice anybody enough to like them. But he's still
staring at you."
"Stop looking at him," I hissed.
She snickered, but she looked away. I raised my head enough to make sure that she did, contemplating
violence if she resisted.
Mike interrupted us then — he was planning an epic battle of the blizzard in the parking lot after school
and wanted us to join. Jessica agreed enthusiastically. The way she looked at Mike left little doubt that
she would be up for anything he suggested. I kept silent. I would have to hide in the gym until the parking
lot cleared.
For the rest of the lunch hour I very carefully kept my eyes at my own table. I decided to honor the
bargain I'd made with myself. Since he didn't look angry, I would go to Biology. My stomach did
frightened little flips at the thought of sitting next to him again.
I didn't really want to walk to class with Mike as usual — he seemed to be a popular target for the
snowball snipers — but when we went to the door, everyone besides me groaned in unison. It was
raining, washing all traces of the snow away in clear, icy ribbons down the side of the walkway. I pulled
my hood up, secretly pleased. I would be free to go straight home after Gym.
Mike kept up a string of complaints on the way to building four.
Once inside the classroom, I saw with relief that my table was still empty. Mr. Banner was walking
around the room, distributing one microscope and box of slides to each table. Class didn't start for a few
minutes, and the room buzzed with conversation. I kept my eyes away from the door, doodling idly on
the cover of my notebook.
I heard very clearly when the chair next to me moved, but my eyes stayed carefully focused on the
pattern I was drawing.
"Hello," said a quiet, musical voice.

I looked up, stunned that he was speaking to me. He was sitting as far away from me as the desk
allowed, but his chair was angled toward me. His hair was dripping wet, disheveled — even so, he
looked like he'd just finished shooting a commercial for hair gel. His dazzling face was friendly, open, a
slight smile on his flawless lips. But his eyes were careful.
"My name is Edward Cullen," he continued. "I didn't have a chance to introduce myself last week. You
must be Bella Swan."
My mind was spinning with confusion. Had I made up the whole thing? He was perfectly polite now. I
had to speak; he was waiting. But I couldn't think of anything conventional to say.
"H-how do you know my name?" I stammered.
He laughed a soft, enchanting laugh.
"Oh, I think everyone knows your name. The whole town's been waiting for you to arrive."
I grimaced. I knew it was something like that.
"No," I persisted stupidly. "I meant, why did you call me Bella?"
He seemed confused. "Do you prefer Isabella?"
"No, I like Bella," I said. "But I think Charlie — I mean my dad — must call me Isabella behind my back
— that's what everyone here seems to know me as," I tried to explain, feeling like an utter moron.
"Oh." He let it drop. I looked away awkwardly.
Thankfully, Mr. Banner started class at that moment. I tried to concentrate as he explained the lab we
would be doing today. The slides in the box were out of order. Working as lab partners, we had to
separate the slides of onion root tip cells into the phases of mitosis they represented and label them
accordingly. We weren't supposed to use our books. In twenty minutes, he would be coming around to
see who had it right.
"Get started," he commanded.
"Ladies first, partner?" Edward asked. I looked up to see him smiling a crooked smile so beautiful that I
could only stare at him like an idiot.
"Or I could start, if you wish." The smile faded; he was obviously wondering if I was mentally competent.
"No," I said, flushing. "I'll go ahead."
I was showing off, just a little. I'd already done this lab, and I knew what I was looking for. It should be
easy. I snapped the first slide into place under the microscope and adjusted it quickly to the 40X
objective. I studied the slide briefly.
My assessment was confident. "Prophase."
"Do you mind if I look?" he asked as I began to remove the slide. His hand caught mine, to stop me, as
he asked. His fingers were ice-cold, like he'd been holding them in a snowdrift before class. But that
wasn't why I jerked my hand away so quickly. When he touched me, it stung my hand as if an electric
current had passed through us.
"I'm sorry," he muttered, pulling his hand back immediately. However, he continued to reach for the

microscope. I watched him, still staggered, as he examined the slide for an even shorter time than I had.
"Prophase," he agreed, writing it neatly in the first space on our worksheet. He swiftly switched out the
first slide for the second, and then glanced at it cursorily.
"Anaphase," he murmured, writing it down as he spoke.
I kept my voice indifferent. "May I?"
He smirked and pushed the microscope to me.
I looked through the eyepiece eagerly, only to be disappointed. Dang it, he was right.
"Slide three?" I held out my hand without looking at him.
He handed it to me; it seemed like he was being careful not to touch my skin again.
I took the most fleeting look I could manage.
"Interphase." I passed him the microscope before he could ask for it. He took a swift peek, and then
wrote it down. I would have written it while he looked, but his clear, elegant script intimidated me. I
didn't want to spoil the page with my clumsy scrawl.
We were finished before anyone else was close. I could see Mike and his partner comparing two slides
again and again, and another group had their book open under the table.
Which left me with nothing to do but try to not look at him… unsuccessfully. I glanced up, and he was
staring at me, that same inexplicable look of frustration in his eyes. Suddenly I identified that subtle
difference in his face.
"Did you get contacts?" I blurted out unthinkingly.
He seemed puzzled by my unexpected question. "No."
"Oh," I mumbled. "I thought there was something different about your eyes."
He shrugged, and looked away.
In fact, I was sure there was something different. I vividly remembered the flat black color of his eyes the
last time he'd glared at me — the color was striking against the background of his pale skin and his
auburn hair. Today, his eyes were a completely different color: a strange ocher, darker than butterscotch,
but with the same golden tone. I didn't understand how that could be, unless he was lying for some
reason about the contacts. Or maybe Forks was making me crazy in the literal sense of the word.
I looked down. His hands were clenched into hard fists again.
Mr. Banner came to our table then, to see why we weren't working. He looked over our shoulders to
glance at the completed lab, and then stared more intently to check the answers.
"So, Edward, didn't you think Isabella should get a chance with the microscope?" Mr. Banner asked.
"Bella," Edward corrected automatically. "Actually, she identified three of the five."
Mr. Banner looked at me now; his expression was skeptical.
"Have you done this lab before?" he asked.

clear detail several things at once.
Edward Cullen was standing four cars down from me, staring at me in horror. His face stood out from a
sea of faces, all frozen in the same mask of shock. But of more immediate importance was the dark blue
van that was skidding, tires locked and squealing against the brakes, spinning wildly across the ice of the
parking lot. It was going to hit the back corner of my truck, and I was standing between them. I didn't
even have time to close my eyes.
Just before I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck bed, something hit me, hard,
but not from the direction I was expecting. My head cracked against the icy blacktop, and I felt
something solid and cold pinning me to the ground. I was lying on the pavement behind the tan car I'd
parked next to. But I didn't have a chance to notice anything else, because the van was still coming. It
had curled gratingly around the end of the truck and, still spinning and sliding, was about to collide with
me again.
A low oath made me aware that someone was with me, and the voice was impossible not to recognize.
Two long, white hands shot out protectively in front of me, and the van shuddered to a stop a foot from
my face, the large hands fitting providentially into a deep dent in the side of the van's body.
Then his hands moved so fast they blurred. One was suddenly gripping under the body of the van, and
something was dragging me, swinging my legs around like a rag doll's, till they hit the tire of the tan car. A
groaning metallic thud hurt my ears, and the van settled, glass popping, onto the asphalt — exactly
where, a second ago, my legs had been.
It was absolutely silent for one long second before the screaming began. In the abrupt bedlam, I could
hear more than one person shouting my name. But more clearly than all the yelling, I could hear Edward
Cullen's low, frantic voice in my ear.
"Bella? Are you all right?"
"I'm fine." My voice sounded strange. I tried to sit up, and realized he was holding me against the side of
his body in an iron grasp.
"Be careful," he warned as I struggled. "I think you hit your head pretty hard."
I became aware of a throbbing ache centered above my left ear.
"Ow," I said, surprised.
"That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he was suppressing laughter.
"How in the…" I trailed off, trying to clear my head, get my bearings. "How did you get over here so
fast?"
"I was standing right next to you, Bella," he said, his tone serious again.
I turned to sit up, and this time he let me, releasing his hold around my waist and sliding as far from me as
he could in the limited space. I looked at his concerned, innocent expression and was disoriented again
by the force of his gold-colored eyes. What was I asking him?
And then they found us, a crowd of people with tears streaming down their faces, shouting at each other,
shouting at us.
"Don't move," someone instructed.

"Get Tyler out of the van!" someone else shouted.
There was a flurry of activity around us. I tried to get up, but Edward's cold hand pushed my shoulder
down.
"Just stay put for now."
"But it's cold," I complained. It surprised me when he chuckled under his breath. There was an edge to
the sound.
"You were over there," I suddenly remembered, and his chuckle stopped short. "You were by your car."
His expression turned hard. "No, I wasn't."
"I saw you." All around us was chaos. I could hear the gruffer voices of adults arriving on the scene. But I
obstinately held on to our argument; I was right, and he was going to admit it.
"Bella, I was standing with you, and I pulled you out of the way." He unleashed the full, devastating
power of his eyes on me, as if trying to communicate something crucial.
"No." I set my jaw.
The gold in his eyes blazed. "Please, Bella."
"Why?" I demanded.
"Trust me," he pleaded, his soft voice overwhelming.
I could hear the sirens now. "Will you promise to explain everything to me later?"
"Fine," he snapped, abruptly exasperated.
"Fine," I repeated angrily.
It took six EMTs and two teachers — Mr. Varner and Coach Clapp — to shift the van far enough away
from us to bring the stretchers in. Edward vehemently refused his, and I tried to do the same, but the
traitor told them I'd hit my head and probably had a concussion. I almost died of humiliation when they
put on the neck brace. It looked like the entire school was there, watching soberly as they loaded me in
the back of the ambulance. Edward got to ride in the front. It was maddening.
To make matters worse, Chief Swan arrived before they could get me safely away.
"Bella!" he yelled in panic when he recognized me on the stretcher.
"I'm completely fine, Char — Dad," I sighed. "There's nothing wrong with me."
He turned to the closest EMT for a second opinion. I tuned him out to consider the jumble of inexplicable
images churning chaotically in my head. When they'd lifted me away from the car, I had seen the deep
dent in the tan car's bumper — a very distinct dent that fit the contours of Edward's shoulders… as if he
had braced himself against the car with enough force to damage the metal frame…
And then there was his family, looking on from the distance, with expressions that ranged from
disapproval to fury but held no hint of concern for their brother's safety.
I tried to think of a logical solution that could explain what I had just seen — a solution that excluded the

assumption that I was insane.
Naturally, the ambulance got a police escort to the county hospital. I felt ridiculous the whole time they
were unloading me. What made it worse was that Edward simply glided through the hospital doors under
his own power. I ground my teeth together.
They put me in the emergency room, a long room with a line of beds separated by pastel-patterned
curtains. A nurse put a pressure cuff on my arm and a thermometer under my tongue. Since no one
bothered pulling the curtain around to give me some privacy, I decided I wasn't obligated to wear the
stupid-looking neck brace anymore. When the nurse walked away, I quickly unfastened the Velcro and
threw it under the bed.
There was another flurry of hospital personnel, another stretcher brought to the bed next to me. I
recognized Tyler Crowley from my Government class beneath the bloodstained bandages wrapped
tightly around his head. Tyler looked a hundred times worse than I felt. But he was staring anxiously at
me.
"Bella, I'm so sorry!"
"I'm fine, Tyler — you look awful, are you all right?" As we spoke, nurses began unwinding his soiled
bandages, exposing a myriad of shallow slices all over his forehead and left cheek.
He ignored me. "I thought I was going to kill you! I was going too fast, and I hit the ice wrong…" He
winced as one nurse started dabbing at his face.
"Don't worry about it; you missed me."
"How did you get out of the way so fast? You were there, and then you were gone…"
"Umm… Edward pulled me out of the way."
He looked confused. "Who?"
"Edward Cullen — he was standing next to me." I'd always been a terrible liar; I didn't sound convincing
at all.
"Cullen? I didn't see him… wow, it was all so fast, I guess. Is he okay?"
"I think so. He's here somewhere, but they didn't make him use a stretcher."
I knew I wasn't crazy. What had happened? There was no way to explain away what I'd seen.
They wheeled me away then, to X-ray my head. I told them there was nothing wrong, and I was right.
Not even a concussion. I asked if I could leave, but the nurse said I had to talk to a doctor first. So I was
trapped in the ER, waiting, harassed by Tyler's constant apologies and promises to make it up to me. No
matter how many times I tried to convince him I was fine, he continued to torment himself. Finally, I
closed my eyes and ignored him. He kept up a remorseful mumbling.
"Is she sleeping?" a musical voice asked. My eyes flew open.
Edward was standing at the foot of my bed, smirking. I glared at him. It wasn't easy — it would have
been more natural to ogle.
"Hey, Edward, I'm really sorry —" Tyler began.

"Take some Tylenol for the pain," he suggested as he steadied me.
"It doesn't hurt that bad," I insisted.
"It sounds like you were extremely lucky," Dr. Cullen said, smiling as he signed my chart with a flourish.
"Lucky Edward happened to be standing next to me," I amended with a hard glance at the subject of my
statement.
"Oh, well, yes," Dr. Cullen agreed, suddenly occupied with the papers in front of him. Then he looked
away, at Tyler, and walked to the next bed. My intuition flickered; the doctor was in on it.
"I'm afraid that you'll have to stay with us just a little bit longer," he said to Tyler, and began checking his
cuts.
As soon as the doctor's back was turned, I moved to Edward's side.
"Can I talk to you for a minute?" I hissed under my breath. He took a step back from me, his jaw
suddenly clenched.
"Your father is waiting for you," he said through his teeth.
I glanced at Dr. Cullen and Tyler.
"I'd like to speak with you alone, if you don't mind," I pressed.
He glared, and then turned his back and strode down the long room. I nearly had to run to keep up. As
soon as we turned the corner into a short hallway, he spun around to face me.
"What do you want?" he asked, sounding annoyed. His eyes were cold.
His unfriendliness intimidated me. My words came out with less severity than I'd intended. "You owe me
an explanation," I reminded him.
"I saved your life — I don't owe you anything."
I flinched back from the resentment in his voice. "You promised."
"Bella, you hit your head, you don't know what you're talking about." His tone was cutting.
My temper flared now, and I glared defiantly at him. "There's nothing wrong with my head."
He glared back. "What do you want from me, Bella?"
"I want to know the truth," I said. "I want to know why I'm lying for you."
"What do you think happened?" he snapped.
It came out in a rush.
"All I know is that you weren't anywhere near me — Tyler didn't see you, either, so don't tell me I hit my
head too hard. That van was going to crush us both — and it didn't, and your hands left dents in the side
of it — and you left a dent in the other car, and you're not hurt at all — and the van should have smashed
my legs, but you were holding it up…" I could hear how crazy it sounded, and I couldn't continue. I was
so mad I could feel the tears coming; I tried to force them back by grinding my teeth together.

"Mr. Cullen?" the teacher called, seeking the answer to a question that I hadn't heard.
"The Krebs Cycle," Edward answered, seeming reluctant as he turned to look at Mr. Banner.
I looked down at my book as soon as his eyes released me, trying to find my place. Cowardly as ever, I
shifted my hair over my right shoulder to hide my face. I couldn't believe the rush of emotion pulsing
through me — just because he'd happened to look at me for the first time in a half-dozen weeks. I
couldn't allow him to have this level of influence over me. It was pathetic. More than pathetic, it was
unhealthy.
I tried very hard not to be aware of him for the rest of the hour, and, since that was impossible, at least
not to let him know that I was aware of him. When the bell rang at last, I turned my back to him to gather
my things, expecting him to leave immediately as usual.
"Bella?" His voice shouldn't have been so familiar to me, as if I'd known the sound of it all my life rather
than for just a few short weeks.
I turned slowly, unwillingly. I didn't want to feel what I knew I would feel when I looked at his
too-perfect face. My expression was wary when I finally turned to him; his expression was unreadable.
He didn't say anything.
"What? Are you speaking to me again?" I finally asked, an unintentional note of petulance in my voice.
His lips twitched, fighting a smile. "No, not really," he admitted.
I closed my eyes and inhaled slowly through my nose, aware that I was gritting my teeth. He waited.
"Then what do you want, Edward?" I asked, keeping my eyes closed; it was easier to talk to him
coherently that way.
"I'm sorry." He sounded sincere. "I'm being very rude, I know. But it's better this way, really."
I opened my eyes. His face was very serious.
"I don't know what you mean," I said, my voice guarded.
"It's better if we're not friends," he explained. "Trust me."
My eyes narrowed. I'd heard that before.
"It's too bad you didn't figure that out earlier," I hissed through my teeth. "You could have saved yourself
all this regret."
"Regret?" The word, and my tone, obviously caught him off guard. "Regret for what?"
"For not just letting that stupid van squish me."
He was astonished. He stared at me in disbelief.
When he finally spoke, he almost sounded mad. "You think I regret saving your life?"
"I know you do," I snapped.
"You don't know anything." He was definitely mad.
I turned my head sharply away from him, clenching my jaw against all the wild accusations I wanted to

hurl at him. I gathered my books together, then stood and walked to the door. I meant to sweep
dramatically out of the room, but of course I caught the toe of my boot on the door jamb and dropped
my books. I stood there for a moment, thinking about leaving them. Then I sighed and bent to pick them
up. He was there; he'd already stacked them into a pile. He handed them to me, his face hard.
"Thank you," I said icily.
His eyes narrowed.
"You're welcome," he retorted.
I straightened up swiftly, turned away from him again, and stalked off to Gym without looking back.
Gym was brutal. We'd moved on to basketball. My team never passed me the ball, so that was good,
but I fell down a lot. Sometimes I took people with me. Today I was worse than usual because my head
was so filled with Edward. I tried to concentrate on my feet, but he kept creeping back into my thoughts
just when I really needed my balance.
It was a relief, as always, to leave. I almost ran to the truck; there were just so many people I wanted to
avoid. The truck had suffered only minimal damage in the accident. I'd had to replace the taillights, and if
I'd had a real paint job, I would have touched that up. Tyler's parents had to sell their van for parts.
I almost had a stroke when I rounded the corner and saw a tall, dark figure leaning against the side of my
truck. Then I realized it was just Eric. I started walking again.
"Hey, Eric," I called.
"Hi, Bella."
"What's up?" I said as I was unlocking the door. I wasn't paying attention to the uncomfortable edge in
his voice, so his next words took me by surprise.
"Uh, I was just wondering… if you would go to the spring dance with me?" His voice broke on the last
word.
"I thought it was girls' choice," I said, too startled to be diplomatic.
"Well, yeah," he admitted, shamefaced.
I recovered my composure and tried to make my smile warm. "Thank you for asking me, but I'm going to
be in Seattle that day."
"Oh," he said. "Well, maybe next time."
"Sure," I agreed, and then bit my lip. I wouldn't want him to take that too literally.
He slouched off, back toward the school. I heard a low chuckle.
Edward was walking past the front of my truck, looking straight forward, his lips pressed together. I
yanked the door open and jumped inside, slamming it loudly behind me. I revved the engine deafeningly
and reversed out into the aisle. Edward was in his car already, two spaces down, sliding out smoothly in
front of me, cutting me off. He stopped there — to wait for his family; I could see the four of them
walking this way, but still by the cafeteria. I considered taking out the rear of his shiny Volvo, but there
were too many witnesses. I looked in my rearview mirror. A line was beginning to form. Directly behind
me, Tyler Crowley was in his recently acquired used Sentra, waving. I was too aggravated to

My stomach twisted as I realized what he must have meant. He must see how absorbed I was by him; he
must not want to lead me on… so we couldn't even be friends… because he wasn't interested in me at
all.
Of course he wasn't interested in me, I thought angrily, my eyes stinging — a delayed reaction to the
onions. I wasn't interesting. And he was. Interesting… and brilliant… and mysterious… and perfect…
and beautiful… and possibly able to lift full-sized vans with one hand.
Well, that was fine. I could leave him alone. I would leave him alone. I would get through my
self-imposed sentence here in purgatory, and then hopefully some school in the Southwest, or possibly
Hawaii, would offer me a scholarship. I focused my thoughts on sunny beaches and palm trees as I
finished the enchiladas and put them in the oven.
Charlie seemed suspicious when he came home and smelled the green peppers. I couldn't blame him —
the closest edible Mexican food was probably in southern California. But he was a cop, even if just a
small-town cop, so he was brave enough to take the first bite. He seemed to like it. It was fun to watch
as he slowly began trusting me in the kitchen.
"Dad?" I asked when he was almost done.
"Yeah, Bella?"
"Um, I just wanted to let you know that I'm going to Seattle for the day a week from Saturday… if that's
okay?" I didn't want to ask permission — it set a bad precedent — but I felt rude, so I tacked it on at
the end.
"Why?" He sounded surprised, as if he were unable to imagine something that Forks couldn't offer.
"Well, I wanted to get few books — the library here is pretty limited — and maybe look at some
clothes." I had more money than I was used to having, since, thanks to Charlie, I hadn't had to pay for a
car. Not that the truck didn't cost me quite a bit in the gas department.
"That truck probably doesn't get very good gas mileage," he said, echoing my thoughts.
"I know, I'll stop in Montesano and Olympia — and Tacoma if I have to."
"Are you going all by yourself?" he asked, and I couldn't tell if he was suspicious I had a secret boyfriend
or just worried about car trouble.
"Yes."
"Seattle is a big city — you could get lost," he fretted.
"Dad, Phoenix is five times the size of Seattle — and I can read a map, don't worry about it."
"Do you want me to come with you?"
I tried to be crafty as I hid my horror.
"That's all right, Dad, I'll probably just be in dressing rooms all day — very boring."
"Oh, okay." The thought of sitting in women's clothing stores for any period of time immediately put him
off.
"Thanks." I smiled at him.

"Will you be back in time for the dance?"
Grrr. Only in a town this small would a father know when the high school dances were.
"No — I don't dance, Dad." He, of all people, should understand that — I didn't get my balance
problems from my mother.
He did understand. "Oh, that's right," he realized.
The next morning, when I pulled into the parking lot, I deliberately parked as far as possible from the
silver Volvo. I didn't want to put myself in the path of too much temptation and end up owing him a new
car. Getting out of the cab, I fumbled with my key and it fell into a puddle at my feet. As I bent to get it, a
white hand flashed out and grabbed it before I could. I jerked upright. Edward Cullen was right next to
me, leaning casually against my truck.
"How do you do that?" I asked in amazed irritation.
"Do what?" He held my key out as he spoke. As I reached for it, he dropped it into my palm.
"Appear out of thin air."
"Bella, it's not my fault if you are exceptionally unobservant." His voice was quiet as usual — velvet,
muted.
I scowled at his perfect face. His eyes were light again today, a deep, golden honey color. Then I had to
look down, to reassemble my now-tangled thoughts.
"Why the traffic jam last night?" I demanded, still looking away. "I thought you were supposed to be
pretending I don't exist, not irritating me to death."
"That was for Tyler's sake, not mine. I had to give him his chance." He snickered.
"You…" I gasped. I couldn't think of a bad enough word. It felt like the heat of my anger should
physically burn him, but he only seemed more amused.
"And I'm not pretending you don't exist," he continued.
"So you are trying to irritate me to death? Since Tyler's van didn't do the job?"
Anger flashed in his tawny eyes. His lips pressed into a hard line, all signs of humor gone.
"Bella, you are utterly absurd," he said, his low voice cold.
My palms tingled — I wanted so badly to hit something. I was surprised at myself. I was usually a
nonviolent person. I turned my back and started to walk away.
"Wait," he called. I kept walking, sloshing angrily through the rain. But he was next to me, easily keeping
pace.
"I'm sorry, that was rude," he said as we walked. I ignored him. "I'm not saying it isn't true," he continued,
"but it was rude to say it, anyway."
"Why won't you leave me alone?" I grumbled.
"I wanted to ask you something, but you sidetracked me," he chuckled. He seemed to have recovered

his good humor.
"Do you have a multiple personality disorder?" I asked severely.
"You're doing it again."
I sighed. "Fine then. What do you want to ask?"
"I was wondering if, a week from Saturday — you know, the day of the spring dance —"
"Are you trying to be funny?" I interrupted him, wheeling toward him. My face got drenched as I looked
up at his expression.
His eyes were wickedly amused. "Will you please allow me to finish?"
I bit my lip and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't do anything rash.
"I heard you say you were going to Seattle that day, and I was wondering if you wanted a ride."
That was unexpected.
"What?" I wasn't sure what he was getting at.
"Do you want a ride to Seattle?"
"With who?" I asked, mystified.
"Myself, obviously." He enunciated every syllable, as if he were talking to someone mentally
handicapped.
I was still stunned. "Why?"
"Well, I was planning to go to Seattle in the next few weeks, and, to be honest, I'm not sure if your truck
can make it."
"My truck works just fine, thank you very much for your concern." I started to walk again, but I was too
surprised to maintain the same level of anger.
"But can your truck make it there on one tank of gas?" He matched my pace again.
"I don't see how that is any of your business." Stupid, shiny Volvo owner.
"The wasting of finite resources is everyone's business."
"Honestly, Edward." I felt a thrill go through me as I said his name, and I hated it. "I can't keep up with
you. I thought you didn't want to be my friend."
"I said it would be better if we weren't friends, not that I didn't want to be."
"Oh, thanks, now that's all cleared up." Heavy sarcasm. I realized I had stopped walking again. We
were under the shelter of the cafeteria roof now, so I could more easily look at his face. Which certainly
didn't help my clarity of thought.
"It would be more… prudent for you not to be my friend," he explained. "But I'm tired of trying to stay
away from you, Bella."

blood flowed. I swallowed convulsively, my stomach heaving.
"And then apply it to the card," he finished, holding up the dripping red card for us to see. I closed my
eyes, trying to hear through the ringing in my ears.
"The Red Cross is having a blood drive in Port Angeles next weekend, so I thought you should all know
your blood type." He sounded proud of himself. "Those of you who aren't eighteen yet will need a
parent's permission — I have slips at my desk."
He continued through the room with his water drops. I put my cheek against the cool black tabletop and
tried to hold on to my consciousness. All around me I could hear squeals, complaints, and giggles as my
classmates skewered their fingers. I breathed slowly in and out through my mouth.
"Bella, are you all right?" Mr. Banner asked. His voice was close to my head, and it sounded alarmed.
"I already know my blood type, Mr. Banner," I said in a weak voice. I was afraid to raise my head.
"Are you feeling faint?"
"Yes, sir," I muttered, internally kicking myself for not ditching when I had the chance.
"Can someone take Bella to the nurse, please?" he called.
I didn't have to look up to know that it would be Mike who volunteered.
"Can you walk?" Mr. Banner asked.
"Yes," I whispered. Just let me get out of here, I thought. I'll crawl.
Mike seemed eager as he put his arm around my waist and pulled my arm over his shoulder. I leaned
against him heavily on the way out of the classroom.
Mike towed me slowly across campus. When we were around the edge of the cafeteria, out of sight of
building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped.
"Just let me sit for a minute, please?" I begged.
He helped me sit on the edge of the walk.
"And whatever you do, keep your hand in your pocket," I warned. I was still so dizzy. I slumped over on
my side, putting my cheek against the freezing, damp cement of the sidewalk, closing my eyes. That
seemed to help a little.
"Wow, you're green, Bella," Mike said nervously.
"Bella?" a different voice called from the distance.
No! Please let me be imagining that horribly familiar voice.
"What's wrong — is she hurt?" His voice was closer now, and he sounded upset. I wasn't imagining it. I
squeezed my eyes shut, hoping to die. Or, at the very least, not to throw up.
Mike seemed stressed. "I think she's fainted. I don't know what happened, she didn't even stick her
finger."
"Bella." Edward's voice was right beside me, relieved now. "Can you hear me?"

"You can go back to class now," she told him.
"I'm supposed to stay with her." He said this with such assured authority that — even though she pursed
her lips — the nurse didn't argue it further.
"I'll go get you some ice for your forehead, dear," she said to me, and then bustled out of the room.
"You were right," I moaned, letting my eyes close.
"I usually am — but about what in particular this time?"
"Ditching is healthy." I practiced breathing evenly.
"You scared me for a minute there," he admitted after a pause. His tone made it sound like he was
confessing a humiliating weakness. "I thought Newton was dragging your dead body off to bury it in the
woods."
"Ha ha." I still had my eyes closed, but I was feeling more normal every minute.
"Honestly — I've seen corpses with better color. I was concerned that I might have to avenge your
murder."
"Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad."
"He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully.
"You can't know that," I argued, but then I wondered suddenly if he could.
"I saw his face — I could tell."
"How did you see me? I thought you were ditching." I was almost fine now, though the queasiness would
probably pass faster if I'd eaten something for lunch. On the other hand, maybe it was lucky my stomach
was empty.
"I was in my car, listening to a CD." Such a normal response — it surprised me.
I heard the door and opened my eyes to see the nurse with a cold compress in her hand.
"Here you go, dear." She laid it across my forehead. "You're looking better," she added.
"I think I'm fine," I said, sitting up. Just a little ringing in my ears, no spinning. The mint green walls stayed
where they should.
I could see she was about to make me lie back down, but the door opened just then, and Ms. Cope
stuck her head in.
"We've got another one," she warned.
I hopped down to free up the cot for the next invalid.
I handed the compress back to the nurse. "Here, I don't need this."
And then Mike staggered through the door, now supporting a sallow-looking Lee Stephens, another boy
in our Biology class. Edward and I drew back against the wall to give them room.
"Oh no," Edward muttered. "Go out to the office, Bella."

Fainting spells always exhausted me.
I heard Edward speaking softly at the counter.
"Ms. Cope?"
"Yes?" I hadn't heard her return to her desk.
"Bella has Gym next hour, and I don't think she feels well enough. Actually, I was thinking I should take
her home now. Do you think you could excuse her from class?" His voice was like melting honey. I could
imagine how much more overwhelming his eyes would be.
"Do you need to be excused, too, Edward?" Ms. Cope fluttered. Why couldn't I do that?
"No, I have Mrs. Goff, she won't mind."
"Okay, it's all taken care of. You feel better, Bella," she called to me. I nodded weakly, hamming it up
just a bit.
"Can you walk, or do you want me to carry you again?" With his back to the receptionist, his expression
became sarcastic.
"I'll walk."
I stood carefully, and I was still fine. He held the door for me, his smile polite but his eyes mocking. I
walked out into the cold, fine mist that had just begun to fall. It felt nice — the first time I'd enjoyed the
constant moisture falling out of the sky — as it washed my face clean of the sticky perspiration.
"Thanks," I said as he followed me out. "It's almost worth getting sick to miss Gym."
"Anytime." He was staring straight forward, squinting into the rain.
"So are you going? This Saturday, I mean?" I was hoping he would, though it seemed unlikely. I couldn't
picture him loading up to carpool with the rest of the kids from school; he didn't belong in the same
world. But just hoping that he might gave me the first twinge of enthusiasm I'd felt for the outing.
"Where are you all going, exactly?" He was still looking ahead, expressionless.
"Down to La Push, to First Beach." I studied his face, trying to read it. His eyes seemed to narrow
infinitesimally.
He glanced down at me from the corner of his eye, smiling wryly. "I really don't think I was invited."
I sighed. "I just invited you."
"Let's you and I not push poor Mike any further this week. We don't want him to snap." His eyes
danced; he was enjoying the idea more than he should.
"Mike-schmike." I muttered, preoccupied by the way he'd said "you and I." I liked it more than I should.
We were near the parking lot now. I veered left, toward my truck. Something caught my jacket, yanking
me back.
"Where do you think you're going?" he asked, outraged. He was gripping a fistful of my jacket in one
hand.

I was confused. "I'm going home."
"Didn't you hear me promise to take you safely home? Do you think I'm going to let you drive in your
condition?" His voice was still indignant.
"What condition? And what about my truck?" I complained.
"I'll have Alice drop it off after school." He was towing me toward his car now, pulling me by my jacket.
It was all I could do to keep from falling backward. He'd probably just drag me along anyway if I did.
"Let go!" I insisted. He ignored me. I staggered along sideways across the wet sidewalk until we reached
the Volvo. Then he finally freed me — I stumbled against the passenger door.
"You are so pushy!" I grumbled.
"It's open," was all he responded. He got in the driver's side.
"I am perfectly capable of driving myself home!" I stood by the car, fuming. It was raining harder now,
and I'd never put my hood up, so my hair was dripping down my back.
He lowered the automatic window and leaned toward me across the seat. "Get in, Bella."
I didn't answer. I was mentally calculating my chances of reaching the truck before he could catch me. I
had to admit, they weren't good.
"I'll just drag you back," he threatened, guessing my plan.
I tried to maintain what dignity I could as I got into his car. I wasn't very successful — I looked like a
half-drowned cat and my boots squeaked.
"This is completely unnecessary," I said stiffly.
He didn't answer. He fiddled with the controls, turning the heater up and the music down. As he pulled
out of the parking lot, I was preparing to give him the silent treatment — my face in full pout mode — but
then I recognized the music playing, and my curiosity got the better of my intentions.
"Clair de Lune?" I asked, surprised.
"You know Debussy?" He sounded surprised, too.
"Not well," I admitted. "My mother plays a lot of classical music around the house — I only know my
favorites."
"It's one of my favorites, too." He stared out through the rain, lost in thought.
I listened to the music, relaxing against the light gray leather seat. It was impossible not to respond to the
familiar, soothing melody. The rain blurred everything outside the window into gray and green smudges. I
began to realize we were driving very fast; the car moved so steadily, so evenly, though, I didn't feel the
speed. Only the town flashing by gave it away.
"What is your mother like?" he asked me suddenly.
I glanced over to see him studying me with curious eyes.
"She looks a lot like me, but she's prettier," I said. He raised his eyebrows. "I have too much Charlie in

me. She's more outgoing than I am, and braver. She's irresponsible and slightly eccentric, and she's a
very unpredictable cook. She's my best friend." I stopped. Talking about her was making me depressed.
"How old are you, Bella?" His voice sounded frustrated for some reason I couldn't imagine. He'd
stopped the car, and I realized we were at Charlie's house already. The rain was so heavy that I could
barely see the house at all. It was like the car was submerged under a river.
"I'm seventeen," I responded, a little confused.
"You don't seem seventeen."
His tone was reproachful; it made me laugh.
"What?" he asked, curious again.
"My mom always says I was born thirty-five years old and that I get more middle-aged every year." I
laughed, and then sighed. "Well, someone has to be the adult." I paused for a second. "You don't seem
much like a junior in high school yourself," I noted.
He made a face and changed the subject.
"So why did your mother marry Phil?"
I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took
me a moment to answer.
"My mother… she's very young for her age. I think Phil makes her feel even younger. At any rate, she's
crazy about him." I shook my head. The attraction was a mystery to me.
"Do you approve?" he asked.
"Does it matter?" I countered. "I want her to be happy… and he is who she wants."
"That's very generous… I wonder," he mused.
"What?"
"Would she extend the same courtesy to you, do you think? No matter who your choice was?" He was
suddenly intent, his eyes searching mine.
"I-I think so," I stuttered. "But she's the parent, after all. It's a little bit different."
"No one too scary then," he teased.
I grinned in response. "What do you mean by scary? Multiple facial piercings and extensive tattoos?"
"That's one definition, I suppose."
"What's your definition?"
But he ignored my question and asked me another. "Do you think that I could be scary?" He raised one
eyebrow, and the faint trace of a smile lightened his face.
I thought for a moment, wondering whether the truth or a lie would go over better. I decided to go with
the truth. "Hmmm… I think you could be, if you wanted to."

I intercepted a few unfriendly glances from Lauren during lunch, which I didn't understand until we were
all walking out of the room together. I was right behind her, just a foot from her slick, silver blond hair,
and she was evidently unaware of that.
"…don't know why Bella" — she sneered my name — "doesn't just sit with the Cullens from now on."
I heard her muttering to Mike. I'd never noticed what an unpleasant, nasal voice she had, and I was
surprised by the malice in it. I really didn't know her well at all, certainly not well enough for her to dislike
me — or so I'd thought. "She's my friend; she sits with us," Mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit
territorially. I paused to let Jess and Angela pass me. I didn't want to hear any more.

During lunch the clouds started to advance, slinking across the blue sky, darting in front of the sun
momentarily, casting long shadows across the beach, and blackening the waves. As they finished eating,
people started to drift away in twos and threes. Some walked down to the edge of the waves, trying to
skip rocks across the choppy surface. Others were gathering a second expedition to the tide pools. Mike
— with Jessica shadowing him — headed up to the one shop in the village. Some of the local kids went
with them; others went along on the hike. By the time they all had scattered, I was sitting alone on my
driftwood log, with Lauren and Tyler occupying themselves by the CD player someone had thought to
bring, and three teenagers from the reservation perched around the circle, including the boy named Jacob
and the oldest boy who had acted as spokesperson.
A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her place by my side. He
looked fourteen, maybe fifteen, and had long, glossy black hair pulled back with a rubber band at the
nape of his neck. His skin was beautiful, silky and russet-colored; his eyes were dark, set deep above the
high planes of his cheekbones. He still had just a hint of childish roundness left around his chin.
Altogether, a very pretty face. However, my positive opinion of his looks was damaged by the first
words out of his mouth.
"You're Isabella Swan, aren't you?"
It was like the first day of school all over again.
"Bella," I sighed.
"I'm Jacob Black." He held his hand out in a friendly gesture. "You bought my dad's truck."
"Oh," I said, relieved, shaking his sleek hand. "You're Billy's son. I probably should remember you."
"No, I'm the youngest of the family — you would remember my older sisters."
"Rachel and Rebecca," I suddenly recalled. Charlie and Billy had thrown us together a lot during my
visits, to keep us busy while they fished. We were all too shy to make much progress as friends. Of
course, I'd kicked up enough tantrums to end the fishing trips by the time I was eleven.
"Are they here?" I examined the girls at the ocean's edge, wondering if I would recognize them now.
"No." Jacob shook his head. "Rachel got a scholarship to Washington State, and Rebecca married a
Samoan surfer — she lives in Hawaii now."
"Married. Wow." I was stunned. The twins were only a little over a year older than I was.
"So how do you like the truck?" he asked.
"I love it. It runs great."
"Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so relived when Charlie bought it. My dad wouldn't let me
work on building another car when we had a perfectly good vehicle right there."
"It's not that slow," I objected.
"Have you tried to go over sixty?"
"No," I admitted.
"Good. Don't." He grinned.

I couldn't help grinning back. "It does great in a collision," I offered in my truck's defense.
"I don't think a tank could take out that old monster," he agreed with another laugh.
"So you build cars?" I asked, impressed.
"When I have free time, and parts. You wouldn't happen to know where I could get my hands on a
master cylinder for a 1986 Volkswagen Rabbit?" he added jokingly. He had a pleasant, husky voice.
"Sorry," I laughed, "I haven't seen any lately, but I'll keep my eyes open for you." As if I knew what that
was. He was very easy to talk with.
He flashed a brilliant smile, looking at me appreciatively in a way I was learning to recognize. I wasn't the
only one who noticed.
"You know Bella, Jacob?" Lauren asked — in what I imagined was an insolent tone — from across the
fire.
"We've sort of known each other since I was born," he laughed, smiling at me again.
"How nice." She didn't sound like she thought it was nice at all, and her pale, fishy eyes narrowed.
"Bella," she called again, watching my face carefully, "I was just saying to Tyler that it was too bad none
of the Cullens could come out today. Didn't anyone think to invite them?" Her expression of concern was
unconvincing.
"You mean Dr. Carlisle Cullen's family?" the tall, older boy asked before I could respond, much to
Lauren's irritation. He was really closer to a man than a boy, and his voice was very deep.
"Yes, do you know them?" she asked condescendingly, turning halfway toward him.
"The Cullens don't come here," he said in a tone that closed the subject, ignoring her question.
Tyler, trying to win back her attention, asked Lauren's opinion on a CD he held. She was distracted.
I stared at the deep-voiced boy, taken aback, but he was looking away toward the dark forest behind
us. He'd said that the Cullens didn't come here, but his tone had implied something more — that they
weren't allowed; they were prohibited. His manner left a strange impression on me, and I tried to ignore it
without success.
Jacob interrupted my meditation. "So is Forks driving you insane yet?"
"Oh, I'd say that's an understatement." I grimaced. He grinned understandingly.
I was still turning over the brief comment on the Cullens, and I had a sudden inspiration. It was a stupid
plan, but I didn't have any better ideas. I hoped that young Jacob was as yet inexperienced around girls,
so that he wouldn't see through my sure-to-be-pitiful attempts at flirting.
"Do you want to walk down the beach with me?" I asked, trying to imitate that way Edward had of
looking up from underneath his eyelashes. It couldn't have nearly the same effect, I was sure, but Jacob
jumped up willingly enough.
As we walked north across the multihued stones toward the driftwood seawall, the clouds finally closed
ranks across the sky, causing the sea to darken and the temperature to drop. I shoved my hands deep
into the pockets of my jacket.

"You have goose bumps," he laughed delightedly.
"You're a good storyteller," I complimented him, still staring into the waves.
"Pretty crazy stuff, though, isn't it? No wonder my dad doesn't want us to talk about it to anyone."
I couldn't control my expression enough to look at him yet. "Don't worry, I won't give you away."
"I guess I just violated the treaty," he laughed.
"I'll take it to the grave," I promised, and then I shivered.
"Seriously, though, don't say anything to Charlie. He was pretty mad at my dad when he heard that some
of us weren't going to the hospital since Dr. Cullen started working there."
"I won't, of course not."
"So do you think we're a bunch of superstitious natives or what?" he asked in a playful tone, but with a
hint of worry. I still hadn't looked away from the ocean.
I turned and smiled at him as normally as I could.
"No. I think you're very good at telling scary stories, though. I still have goose bumps, see?" I held up my
arm.
"Cool." He smiled.
And then the sound of the beach rocks clattering against each other warned us that someone was
approaching. Our heads snapped up at the same time to see Mike and Jessica about fifty yards away,
walking toward us.
"There you are, Bella," Mike called in relief, waving his arm over his head.
"Is that your boyfriend?" Jacob asked, alerted by the jealous edge in Mike's voice. I was surprised it was
so obvious.
"No, definitely not," I whispered. I was tremendously grateful to Jacob, and eager to make him as happy
as possible. I winked at him, carefully turning away from Mike to do so. He smiled, elated by my inept
flirting.
"So when I get my license…" he began.
"You should come see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said this, knowing
that I'd used him. But I really did like Jacob. He was someone I could easily be friends with.
Mike had reached us now, with Jessica still a few paces back. I could see his eyes appraising Jacob, and
looking satisfied at his obvious youth.
"Where have you been?" he asked, though the answer was right in front of him.
"Jacob was just telling me some local stories," I volunteered. "It was really interesting."
I smiled at Jacob warmly, and he grinned back.
"Well," Mike paused, carefully reassessing the situation as he watched our camaraderie. "We're packing
up — it looks like it's going to rain soon."

I told Charlie I had a lot of homework to do, and that I didn't want anything to eat. There was a
basketball game on that he was excited about, though of course I had no idea what was special about it,
so he wasn't aware of anything unusual in my face or tone.
Once in my room, I locked the door. I dug through my desk until I found my old headphones, and I
plugged them into my little CD player. I picked up a CD that Phil had given to me for Christmas. It was
one of his favorite bands, but they used a little too much bass and shrieking for my tastes. I popped it into
place and lay down on my bed. I put on the headphones, hit Play, and turned up the volume until it hurt
my ears. I closed my eyes, but the light still intruded, so I added a pillow over the top half of my face.
I concentrated very carefully on the music, trying to understand the lyrics, to unravel the complicated
drum patterns. By the third time I'd listened through the CD, I knew all the words to the choruses, at
least. I was surprised to find that I really did like the band after all, once I got past the blaring noise. I'd
have to thank Phil again.
And it worked. The shattering beats made it impossible for me to think — which was the whole purpose
of the exercise. I listened to the CD again and again, until I was singing along with all the songs, until,
finally, I fell asleep.
I opened my eyes to a familiar place. Aware in some corner of my consciousness that I was dreaming, I
recognized the green light of the forest. I could hear the waves crashing against the rocks somewhere
nearby. And I knew that if I found the ocean, I'd be able to see the sun. I was trying to follow the sound,
but then Jacob Black was there, tugging on my hand, pulling me back toward the blackest part of the
forest.
"Jacob? What's wrong?" I asked. His face was frightened as he yanked with all his strength against my
resistance; I didn't want to go into the dark.
"Run, Bella, you have to run!" he whispered, terrified.

"This way, Bella!" I recognized Mike's voice calling out of the gloomy heart of the trees, but I couldn't
see him.
"Why?" I asked, still pulling against Jacob's grasp, desperate now to find the sun.
But Jacob let go of my hand and yelped, suddenly shaking, falling to the dim forest floor. He twitched on
the ground as I watched in horror.
"Jacob!" I screamed. But he was gone. In his place was a large red-brown wolf with black eyes. The
wolf faced away from me, pointing toward the shore, the hair on the back of his shoulders bristling, low
growls issuing from between his exposed fangs.
"Bella, run!" Mike cried out again from behind me. But I didn't turn. I was watching a light coming toward
me from the beach.
And then Edward stepped out from the trees, his skin faintly glowing, his eyes black and dangerous. He
held up one hand and beckoned me to come to him. The wolf growled at my feet.
I took a step forward, toward Edward. He smiled then, and his teeth were sharp, pointed.
"Trust me," he purred.
I took another step.
The wolf launched himself across the space between me and the vampire, fangs aiming for the jugular.
"No!" I screamed, wrenching upright out of my bed.
My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player off the bedside table, and it clattered
to the wooden floor.
My light was still on, and I was sitting fully dressed on the bed, with my shoes on. I glanced, disoriented,
at the clock on my dresser. It was five-thirty in the morning.
I groaned, fell back, and rolled over onto my face, kicking off my boots. I was too uncomfortable to get
anywhere near sleep, though. I rolled back over and unbuttoned my jeans, yanking them off awkwardly
as I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of my
skull. I turned onto my side and ripped the rubber band out, quickly combing through the plaits with my
fingers. I pulled the pillow back over my eyes.
It was all no use, of course. My subconscious had dredged up exactly the images I'd been trying so
desperately to avoid. I was going to have to face them now.
I sat up, and my head spun for a minute as the blood flowed downward. First things first, I thought to
myself, happy to put it off as long as possible. I grabbed my bathroom bag.
The shower didn't last nearly as long as I hoped it would, though. Even taking the time to blow-dry my
hair, I was soon out of things to do in the bathroom. Wrapped in a towel, I crossed back to my room. I
couldn't tell if Charlie was still asleep, or if he had already left. I went to look out my window, and the
cruiser was gone. Fishing again.
I dressed slowly in my most comfy sweats and then made my bed — something I never did. I couldn't
put it off any longer. I went to my desk and switched on my old computer.
I hated using the Internet here. My modem was sadly outdated, my free service substandard; just dialing

same texture, as mine — had dwindled, slowly revealing more and more of the shiny skin of his forehead.
But when he smiled I could see a little of the man who had run away with Renée when she was just two
years older than I was now.
I ate breakfast cheerily, watching the dust moats stirring in the sunlight that streamed in the back window.
Charlie called out a goodbye, and I heard the cruiser pull away from the house. I hesitated on my way
out the door, hand on my rain jacket. It would be tempting fate to leave it home. With a sigh, I folded it
over my arm and stepped out into the brightest light I'd seen in months.
By dint of much elbow grease, I was able to get both windows in the truck almost completely rolled
down. I was one of the first ones to school; I hadn't even checked the clock in my hurry to get outside. I
parked and headed toward the seldom-used picnic benches on the south side of the cafeteria. The
benches were still a little damp, so I sat on my jacket, glad to have a use for it. My homework was done
— the product of a slow social life — but there were a few Trig problems I wasn't sure I had right. I
took out my book industriously, but halfway through rechecking the first problem I was daydreaming,
watching the sunlight play on the red-barked trees. I sketched inattentively along the margins of my
homework. After a few minutes, I suddenly realized I'd drawn five pairs of dark eyes staring out of the
page at me. I scrubbed them out with the eraser.
"Bella!" I heard someone call, and it sounded like Mike.
I looked around to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting there,
absentminded. Everyone was in t-shirts, some even in shorts though the temperature couldn't be over
sixty. Mike was coming toward me in khaki shorts and a striped Rugby shirt, waving.
"Hey, Mike," I called, waving back, unable to be halfhearted on a morning like this.
He came to sit by me, the tidy spikes of his hair shining golden in the light, his grin stretching across his
face. He was so delighted to see me, I couldn't help but feel gratified.
"I never noticed before — your hair has red in it," he commented, catching between his fingers a strand
that was fluttering in the light breeze.
"Only in the sun."
I became just a little uncomfortable as he tucked the lock behind my ear.
"Great day, isn't it?"
"My kind of day," I agreed.
"What did you do yesterday?" His tone was just a bit too proprietary.
"I mostly worked on my essay." I didn't add that I was finished with it — no need to sound smug.
He hit his forehead with the heel of his hand. "Oh yeah — that's due Thursday, right?"
"Um, Wednesday, I think."
"Wednesday?" He frowned. "That's not good… What are you writing yours on?"
"Whether Shakespeare's treatment of the female characters is misogynistic."
He stared at me like I'd just spoken in pig Latin.

It's sunny outside today - I know, I'm shocked, too - so I'm going to go outside and soak up
as much vitamin D as I can. I love you,
Bella.

murderously angry.
"Are you okay?" I asked, surprised at how hoarse my voice sounded.
"No," he said curtly, and his tone was livid.
I sat in silence, watching his face while his blazing eyes stared straight ahead, until the car came to a
sudden stop. I glanced around, but it was too dark to see anything beside the vague outline of dark trees
crowding the roadside. We weren't in town anymore.
"Bella?" he asked, his voice tight, controlled.
"Yes?" My voice was still rough. I tried to clear my throat quietly.
"Are you all right?" He still didn't look at me, but the fury was plain on his face.
"Yes," I croaked softly.
"Distract me, please," he ordered.
"I'm sorry, what?"
He exhaled sharply.
"Just prattle about something unimportant until I calm down," he clarified, closing his eyes and pinching
the bridge of his nose with his thumb and forefinger.
"Um." I wracked my brain for something trivial. "I'm going to run over Tyler Crowley tomorrow before
school?"
He was still squeezing his eyes closed, but the corner of his mouth twitched.
"Why?"
"He's telling everyone that he's taking me to prom — either he's insane or he's still trying to make up for
almost killing me last… well, you remember it, and he thinks prom is somehow the correct way to do
this. So I figure if I endanger his life, then we're even, and he can't keep trying to make amends. I don't
need enemies and maybe Lauren would back off if he left me alone. I might have to total his Sentra,
though. If he doesn't have a ride he can't take anyone to prom…" I babbled on.
"I heard about that." He sounded a bit more composed.
"You did?" I asked in disbelief, my previous irritation flaring. "If he's paralyzed from the neck down, he
can't go to the prom, either," I muttered, refining my plan.
Edward sighed, and finally opened his eyes.
"Better?"
"Not really."
I waited, but he didn't speak again. He leaned his head back against the seat, staring at the ceiling of the
car. His face was rigid.
"What's wrong?" My voice came out in a whisper.

"Sometimes I have a problem with my temper, Bella." He was whispering, too, and as he stared out the
window, his eyes narrowed into slits. "But it wouldn't be helpful for me to turn around and hunt down
those…" He didn't finish his sentence, looking away, struggling for a moment to control his anger again.
"At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself."
"Oh." The word seemed inadequate, but I couldn't think of a better response.
We sat in silence again. I glanced at the clock on the dashboard. It was past six-thirty.
"Jessica and Angela will be worried," I murmured. "I was supposed to meet them."
He started the engine without another word, turning around smoothly and speeding back toward town.
We were under the streetlights in no time at all, still going too fast, weaving with ease through the cars
slowly cruising the boardwalk. He parallel-parked against the curb in a space I would have thought much
too small for the Volvo, but he slid in effortlessly in one try. I looked out the window to see the lights of
La Bella Italia, and Jess and Angela just leaving, pacing anxiously away from us.
"How did you know where… ?" I began, but then I just shook my head. I heard the door open and
turned to see him getting out.
"What are you doing?" I asked.
"I'm taking you to dinner." He smiled slightly, but his eyes were hard. He stepped out of the car and
slammed the door. I fumbled with my seat belt, and then hurried to get out of the car as well. He was
waiting for me on the sidewalk.
He spoke before I could. "Go stop Jessica and Angela before I have to track them down, too. I don't
think I could restrain myself if I ran into your other friends again."
I shivered at the threat in his voice.
"Jess! Angela!" I yelled after them, waving when they turned. They rushed back to me, the pronounced
relief on both their faces simultaneously changing to surprise as they saw who I was standing next to.
They hesitated a few feet from us.
"Where have you been?" Jessica's voice was suspicious.
"I got lost," I admitted sheepishly. "And then I ran into Edward." I gestured toward him.
"Would it be all right if I joined you?" he asked in his silken, irresistible voice. I could see from their
staggered expressions that he had never unleashed his talents on them before.
"Er… sure," Jessica breathed.
"Um, actually, Bella, we already ate while we were waiting — sorry," Angela confessed.
"That's fine — I'm not hungry." I shrugged.
"I think you should eat something." Edward's voice was low, but full of authority. He looked up at Jessica
and spoke slightly louder. "Do you mind if I drive Bella home tonight? That way you won't have to wait
while she eats."
"Uh, no problem, I guess…" She bit her lip, trying to figure out from my expression whether that was
what I wanted. I winked at her. I wanted nothing more than to be alone with my perpetual savior. There
were so many questions that I couldn't bombard him with till we were by ourselves.

"Okay." Angela was quicker than Jessica. "See you tomorrow, Bella… Edward." She grabbed Jessica's
hand and pulled her toward the car, which I could see a little ways away, parked across First Street. As
they got in, Jess turned and waved, her face eager with curiosity. I waved back, waiting for them to drive
away before I turned to face him.
"Honestly, I'm not hungry," I insisted, looking up to scrutinize his face. His expression was unreadable.
"Humor me."
He walked to the door of the restaurant and held it open with an obstinate expression. Obviously, there
would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh.
The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was the off-season in Port Angeles. The host was female, and I
understood the look in her eyes as she assessed Edward. She welcomed him a little more warmly than
necessary. I was surprised by how much that bothered me. She was several inches taller than I was, and
unnaturally blond.
"A table for two?" His voice was alluring, whether he was aiming for that or not. I saw her eyes flicker to
me and then away, satisfied by my obvious ordinariness, and by the cautious, no-contact space Edward
kept between us. She led us to a table big enough for four in the center of the most crowded area of the
dining floor.
I was about to sit, but Edward shook his head at me.
"Perhaps something more private?" he insisted quietly to the host. I wasn't sure, but it looked like he
smoothly handed her a tip. I'd never seen anyone refuse a table except in old movies.
"Sure." She sounded as surprised as I was. She turned and led us around a partition to a small ring of
booths — all of them empty. "How's this?"
"Perfect." He flashed his gleaming smile, dazing her momentarily.
"Um" — she shook her head, blinking — "your server will be right out." She walked away unsteadily.
"You really shouldn't do that to people," I criticized. "It's hardly fair."
"Do what?"
"Dazzle them like that — she's probably hyperventilating in the kitchen right now."
He seemed confused.
"Oh, come on," I said dubiously. "You have to know the effect you have on people."
He tilted his head to one side, and his eyes were curious. "I dazzle people?"
"You haven't noticed? Do you think everybody gets their way so easily?"
He ignored my questions. "Do I dazzle you?"
"Frequently," I admitted.
And then our server arrived, her face expectant. The hostess had definitely dished behind the scenes, and
this new girl didn't look disappointed. She flipped a strand of short black hair behind one ear and smiled
with unnecessary warmth.

"Hello. My name is Amber, and I'll be your server tonight. What can I get you to drink?" I didn't miss
that she was speaking only to him.
He looked at me.
"I'll have a Coke." It sounded like a question.
"Two Cokes," he said.
"I'll be right back with that," she assured him with another unnecessary smile. But he didn't see it. He was
watching me.
"What?" I asked when she left.
His eyes stayed fixed on my face. "How are you feeling?"
"I'm fine," I replied, surprised by his intensity.
"You don't feel dizzy, sick, cold… ?"
"Should I?"
He chuckled at my puzzled tone.
"Well, I'm actually waiting for you to go into shock." His face twisted up into that perfect crooked smile.
"I don't think that will happen," I said after I could breathe again. "I've always been very good at
repressing unpleasant things."
"Just the same, I'll feel better when you have some sugar and food in you."
Right on cue, the waitress appeared with our drinks and a basket of breadsticks. She stood with her
back to me as she placed them on the table.
"Are you ready to order?" she asked Edward.
"Bella?" he asked. She turned unwillingly toward me.
I picked the first thing I saw on the menu. "Um… I'll have the mushroom ravioli."
"And you?" She turned back to him with a smile.
"Nothing for me," he said. Of course not.
"Let me know if you change your mind." The coy smile was still in place, but he wasn't looking at her,
and she left dissatisfied.
"Drink," he ordered.
I sipped at my soda obediently, and then drank more deeply, surprised by how thirsty I was. I realized I
had finished the whole thing when he pushed his glass toward me.
"Thanks," I muttered, still thirsty. The cold from the icy soda was radiating through my chest, and I
shivered.
"Are you cold?"

"Holy crow!" I shouted. "Slow down!"
"What's wrong?" He was startled. But the car didn't decelerate.
"You're going a hundred miles an hour!" I was still shouting. I shot a panicky glance out the window, but
it was too dark to see much. The road was only visible in the long patch of bluish brightness from the
headlights. The forest along both sides of the road was like a black wall — as hard as a wall of steel if
we veered off the road at this speed.
"Relax, Bella." He rolled his eyes, still not slowing.
"Are you trying to kill us?" I demanded.
"We're not going to crash."
I tried to modulate my voice. "Why are you in such a hurry?"
"I always drive like this." He turned to smile crookedly at me.
"Keep your eyes on the road!"
"I've never been in an accident, Bella — I've never even gotten a ticket." He grinned and tapped his
forehead. "Built-in radar detector."
"Very funny." I fumed. "Charlie's a cop, remember? I was raised to abide by traffic laws. Besides, if you
turn us into a Volvo pretzel around a tree trunk, you can probably just walk away."
"Probably," he agreed with a short, hard laugh. "But you can't." He sighed, and I watched with relief as
the needle gradually drifted toward eighty. "Happy?"
"Almost."
"I hate driving slow," he muttered.
"This is slow?"
"Enough commentary on my driving," he snapped. "I'm still waiting for your latest theory."
I bit my lip. He looked down at me, his honey eyes unexpectedly gentle.
"I won't laugh," he promised.
"I'm more afraid that you'll be angry with me."
"Is it that bad?"
"Pretty much, yeah."
He waited. I was looking down at my hands, so I couldn't see his expression.
"Go ahead." His voice was calm.
"I don't know how to start," I admitted.
"Why don't you start at the beginning… you said you didn't come up with this on your own."

"No, we got back Sunday."
"Then why weren't any of you in school?" I was frustrated, almost angry as I thought of how much
disappointment I had suffered because of his absence.
"Well, you asked if the sun hurt me, and it doesn't. But I can't go out in the sunlight — at least, not where
anyone can see."
"Why?"
"I'll show you sometime," he promised.
I thought about it for a moment.
"You might have called me," I decided.
He was puzzled. "But I knew you were safe."
"But I didn't know where you were. I —" I hesitated, dropping my eyes.
"What?" His velvety voice was compelling.
"I didn't like it. Not seeing you. It makes me anxious, too." I blushed to be saying this out loud.
He was quiet. I glanced up, apprehensive, and saw that his expression was pained.
"Ah," he groaned quietly. "This is wrong."
I couldn't understand his response. "What did I say?"
"Don't you see, Bella? It's one thing for me to make myself miserable, but a wholly other thing for you to
be so involved." He turned his anguished eyes to the road, his words flowing almost too fast for me to
understand. "I don't want to hear that you feel that way." His voice was low but urgent. His words cut
me. "It's wrong. It's not safe. I'm dangerous, Bella — please, grasp that."
"No." I tried very hard not to look like a sulky child.
"I'm serious," he growled.
"So am I. I told you, it doesn't matter what you are. It's too late."
His voice whipped out, low and harsh. "Never say that."
I bit my lip and was glad he couldn't know how much that hurt. I stared out at the road. We must be
close now. He was driving much too fast.
"What are you thinking?" he asked, his voice still raw. I just shook my head, not sure if I could speak. I
could feel his gaze on my face, but I kept my eyes forward.
"Are you crying?" He sounded appalled. I hadn't realized the moisture in my eyes had brimmed over. I
quickly rubbed my hand across my cheek, and sure enough, traitor tears were there, betraying me.
"No," I said, but my voice cracked.
I saw him reach toward me hesitantly with his right hand, but then he stopped and placed it slowly back
on the steering wheel.

"I'm sorry." His voice burned with regret. I knew he wasn't just apologizing for the words that had upset
me.
The darkness slipped by us in silence.
"Tell me something," he asked after another minute, and I could hear him struggle to use a lighter tone.
"Yes?"
"What were you thinking tonight, just before I came around the corner? I couldn't understand your
expression — you didn't look that scared, you looked like you were concentrating very hard on
something."
"I was trying to remember how to incapacitate an attacker — you know, self-defense. I was going to
smash his nose into his brain." I thought of the dark-haired man with a surge of hate.
"You were going to fight them?" This upset him. "Didn't you think about running?"
"I fall down a lot when I run," I admitted.
"What about screaming for help?"
"I was getting to that part."
He shook his head. "You were right — I'm definitely fighting fate trying to keep you alive."
I sighed. We were slowing, passing into the boundaries of Forks. It had taken less than twenty minutes.
"Will I see you tomorrow?" I demanded.
"Yes — I have a paper due, too." He smiled. "I'll save you a seat at lunch."
It was silly, after everything we'd been through tonight, how that little promise sent flutters through my
stomach, and made me unable to speak.
We were in front of Charlie's house. The lights were on, my truck in its place, everything utterly normal. It
was like waking from a dream. He stopped the car, but I didn't move.
"Do you promise to be there tomorrow?"
"I promise."
I considered that for a moment, then nodded. I pulled his jacket off, taking one last whiff.
"You can keep it — you don't have a jacket for tomorrow," he reminded me.
I handed it back to him. "I don't want to have to explain to Charlie."
"Oh, right." He grinned.
I hesitated, my hand on the door handle, trying to prolong the moment.
"Bella?" he asked in a different tone — serious, but hesitant.
"Yes?" I turned back to him too eagerly.

"Will you promise me something?"
"Yes," I said, and instantly regretted my unconditional agreement. What if he asked me to stay away from
him? I couldn't keep that promise.
"Don't go into the woods alone."
I stared at him in blank confusion. "Why?"
He frowned, and his eyes were tight as he stared past me out the window.
"I'm not always the most dangerous thing out there. Let's leave it at that."
I shuddered slightly at the sudden bleakness in his voice, but I was relieved. This, at least, was an easy
promise to honor. "Whatever you say."
"I'll see you tomorrow," he sighed, and I knew he wanted me to leave now.
"Tomorrow, then." I opened the door unwillingly.
"Bella?" I turned and he was leaning toward me, his pale, glorious face just inches from mine. My heart
stopped beating.
"Sleep well," he said. His breath blew in my face, stunning me. It was the same exquisite scent that clung
to his jacket, but in a more concentrated form. I blinked, thoroughly dazed. He leaned away.
I was unable to move until my brain had somewhat unscrambled itself. Then I stepped out of the car
awkwardly, having to use the frame for support. I thought I heard him chuckle, but the sound was too
quiet for me to be certain.
He waited till I had stumbled to the front door, and then I heard his engine quietly rev. I turned to watch
the silver car disappear around the corner. I realized it was very cold.
I reached for the key mechanically, unlocked the door, and stepped inside.
Charlie called from the living room. "Bella?"
"Yeah, Dad, it's me." I walked in to see him. He was watching a baseball game.
"You're home early."
"Am I?" I was surprised.
"It's not even eight yet," he told me. "Did you girls have fun?"
"Yeah — it was lots of fun." My head was spinning as I tried to remember all the way back to the girls'
night out I had planned. "They both found dresses."
"Are you all right?"
"I'm just tired. I did a lot of walking."
"Well, maybe you should go lie down." He sounded concerned. I wondered what my face looked like.
"I'm just going to call Jessica first."

"Weren't you just with her?" he asked, surprised.
"Yes — but I left my jacket in her car. I want to make sure she brings it tomorrow."
"Well, give her a chance to get home first."
"Right," I agreed.
I went to the kitchen and fell, exhausted, into a chair. I was really feeling dizzy now. I wondered if I was
going to go into shock after all. Get a grip, I told myself.
The phone rang suddenly, startling me. I yanked it off the hook.
"Hello?" I asked breathlessly.
"Bella?"
"Hey, Jess, I was just going to call you."
"You made it home?" Her voice was relieved… and surprised.
"Yes. I left my jacket in your car — could you bring it to me tomorrow?"
"Sure. But tell me what happened!" she demanded.
"Um, tomorrow — in Trig, okay?"
She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?"
"Yes, that's right."
"Okay, I'll talk to you tomorrow, then. Bye!" I could hear the impatience in her voice.
"Bye, Jess."
I walked up the stairs slowly, a heavy stupor clouding my mind. I went through the motions of getting
ready for bed without paying any attention to what I was doing. It wasn't until I was in the shower — the
water too hot, burning my skin — that I realized I was freezing. I shuddered violently for several minutes
before the steaming spray could finally relax my rigid muscles. Then I stood in the shower, too tired to
move, until the hot water began to run out.
I stumbled out, wrapping myself securely in a towel, trying to hold the heat from the water in so the
aching shivers wouldn't return. I dressed for bed swiftly and climbed under my quilt, curling into a ball,
hugging myself to keep warm. A few small shudders trembled through me.
My mind still swirled dizzily, full of images I couldn't understand, and some I fought to repress. Nothing
seemed clear at first, but as I fell gradually closer to unconsciousness, a few certainties became evident.
About three things I was absolutely positive. First, Edward was a vampire. Second, there was part of
him — and I didn't know how potent that part might be — that thirsted for my blood. And third, I was
unconditionally and irrevocably in love with him.

"I can't," he said, startled. Then understanding brightened his eyes. "However, I can read hers — she'll be
waiting to ambush you in class."
I groaned as I pulled off his jacket and handed it to him, replacing it with my own. He folded it over his
arm.
"So what are you going to tell her?"
"A little help?" I pleaded. "What does she want to know?"
He shook his head, grinning wickedly. "That's not fair."
"No, you not sharing what you know — now that's not fair."
He deliberated for a moment as we walked. We stopped outside the door to my first class.
"She wants to know if we're secretly dating. And she wants to know how you feel about me," he finally
said.
"Yikes. What should I say?" I tried to keep my expression very innocent. People were passing us on their
way to class, probably staring, but I was barely aware of them.
"Hmmm." He paused to catch a stray lock of hair that was escaping the twist on my neck and wound it
back into place. My heart spluttered hyperactively. "I suppose you could say yes to the first… if you
don't mind — it's easier than any other explanation."
"I don't mind," I said in a faint voice.
"And as for her other question… well, I'll be listening to hear the answer to that one myself." One side of
his mouth pulled up into my favorite uneven smile. I couldn't catch my breath soon enough to respond to
that remark. He turned and walked away.
"I'll see you at lunch," he called over his shoulder. Three people walking in the door stopped to stare at
me.
I hurried into class, flushed and irritated. He was such a cheater. Now I was even more worried about
what I was going to say to Jessica. I sat in my usual seat, slamming my bag down in aggravation.
"Morning, Bella," Mike said from the seat next to me. I looked up to see an odd, almost resigned look on
his face. "How was Port Angeles?"
"It was…" There was no honest way to sum it up. "Great," I finished lamely. "Jessica got a really cute
dress."
"Did she say anything about Monday night?" he asked, his eyes brightening. I smiled at the turn the
conversation had taken.
"She said she had a really good time," I assured him.
"She did?" he said eagerly.
"Most definitely."
Mr. Mason called the class to order then, asking us to turn in our papers. English and then Government
passed in a blur, while I worried about how to explain things to Jessica and agonized over whether

"I don't know, Jess, lots of stuff," I whispered back. "We talked about the English essay a little." A very,
very little. I think he mentioned it in passing.
"Please, Bella," she begged. "Give me some details."
"Well… okay, I've got one. You should have seen the waitress flirting with him — it was over the top.
But he didn't pay any attention to her at all." Let him make what he could of that.
"That's a good sign," she nodded. "Was she pretty?"
"Very — and probably nineteen or twenty."
"Even better. He must like you."
"I think so, but it's hard to tell. He's always so cryptic," I threw in for his benefit, sighing.
"I don't know how you're brave enough to be alone with him," she breathed.
"Why?" I was shocked, but she didn't understand my reaction.
"He's so… intimidating. I wouldn't know what to say to him." She made a face, probably remembering
this morning or last night, when he'd turned the overwhelming force of his eyes on her.
"I do have some trouble with incoherency when I'm around him," I admitted.
"Oh well. He is unbelievably gorgeous." Jessica shrugged as if this excused any flaws. Which, in her
book, it probably did.
"There's a lot more to him than that."
"Really? Like what?"
I wished I had let it go. Almost as much as I was hoping he'd been kidding about listening in.
"I can't explain it right… but he's even more unbelievable behind the face." The vampire who wanted to
be good — who ran around saving people's lives so he wouldn't be a monster… I stared toward the
front of the room.
"Is that possible?" She giggled.
I ignored her, trying to look like I was paying attention to Mr. Varner.
"So you like him, then?" She wasn't about to give up.
"Yes," I said curtly.
"I mean, do you really like him?" she urged.
"Yes," I said again, blushing. I hoped that detail wouldn't register in her thoughts.
She'd had enough with the single syllable answers. "How much do you like him?"
"Too much," I whispered back. "More than he likes me. But I don't see how I can help that." I sighed,
one blush blending into the next.
Then, thankfully, Mr. Varner called on Jessica for an answer.

She didn't get a chance to start on the subject again during class, and as soon as the bell rang, I took
evasive action.
"In English, Mike asked me if you said anything about Monday night," I told her.
"You're kidding! What did you say?!" she gasped, completely sidetracked.
"I told him you said you had a lot of fun — he looked pleased."
"Tell me exactly what he said, and your exact answer!"
We spent the rest of the walk dissecting sentence structures and most of Spanish on a minute description
of Mike's facial expressions. I wouldn't have helped draw it out for as long as I did if I wasn't worried
about the subject returning to me.
And then the bell rang for lunch. As I jumped up out of my seat, shoving my books roughly in my bag,
my uplifted expression must have tipped Jessica off.
"You're not sitting with us today, are you?" she guessed.
"I don't think so." I couldn't be sure that he wouldn't disappear inconveniently again.
But outside the door to our Spanish class, leaning against the wall — looking more like a Greek god than
anyone had a right to — Edward was waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and
departed.
"See you later, Bella." Her voice was thick with implications. I might have to turn off the ringer on the
phone.
"Hello." His voice was amused and irritated at the same time. He had been listening, it was obvious.
"Hi."
I couldn't think of anything else to say, and he didn't speak — biding his time, I presumed — so it was a
quiet walk to the cafeteria. Walking with Edward through the crowded lunchtime rush was a lot like my
first day here; everyone stared.
He led the way into the line, still not speaking, though his eyes returned to my face every few seconds,
their expression speculative. It seemed to me that irritation was winning out over amusement as the
dominant emotion in his face. I fidgeted nervously with the zipper on my jacket.
He stepped up to the counter and filled a tray with food.
"What are you doing?" I objected. "You're not getting all that for me?"
He shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food.
"Half is for me, of course."
I raised one eyebrow.
He led the way to the same place we'd sat that one time before. From the other end of the long table, a
group of seniors gazed at us in amazement as we sat across from each other. Edward seemed oblivious.
"Take whatever you want," he said, pushing the tray toward me.

"That would be bad?"
He spoke from between clenched teeth. "Extremely."
"Because… ?"
He took a deep breath and stared through the windshield at the thick, rolling clouds that seemed to press
down, almost within reach.
"When we hunt," he spoke slowly, unwillingly, "we give ourselves over to our senses… govern less with
our minds. Especially our sense of smell. If you were anywhere near me when I lost control that way…"
He shook his head, still gazing morosely at the heavy clouds.
I kept my expression firmly under control, expecting the swift flash of his eyes to judge my reaction that
soon followed. My face gave nothing away.
But our eyes held, and the silence deepened — and changed. Flickers of the electricity I'd felt this
afternoon began to charge the atmosphere as he gazed unrelentingly into my eyes. It wasn't until my head
started to swim that I realized I wasn't breathing. When I drew in a jagged breath, breaking the stillness,
he closed his eyes.
"Bella, I think you should go inside now." His low voice was rough, his eyes on the clouds again.
I opened the door, and the arctic draft that burst into the car helped clear my head. Afraid I might
stumble in my woozy state, I stepped carefully out of the car and shut the door behind me without
looking back. The whir of the automatic window unrolling made me turn.
"Oh, Bella?" he called after me, his voice more even. He leaned toward the open window with a faint
smile on his lips.
"Yes?"
"Tomorrow it's my turn."
"Your turn to what?"
He smiled wider, flashing his gleaming teeth. "Ask the questions."
And then he was gone, the car speeding down the street and disappearing around the corner before I
could even collect my thoughts. I smiled as I walked to the house. It was clear he was planning to see me
tomorrow, if nothing else.
That night Edward starred in my dreams, as usual. However, the climate of my unconsciousness had
changed. It thrilled with the same electricity that had charged the afternoon, and I tossed and turned
restlessly, waking often. It was only in the early hours of the morning that I finally sank into an exhausted,
dreamless sleep.
When I woke I was still tired, but edgy as well. I pulled on my brown turtleneck and the inescapable
jeans, sighing as I daydreamed of spaghetti straps and shorts. Breakfast was the usual, quiet event I
expected. Charlie fried eggs for himself; I had my bowl of cereal. I wondered if he had forgotten about
this Saturday. He answered my unspoken question as he stood up to take his plate to the sink.
"About this Saturday…" he began, walking across the kitchen and turning on the faucet.
I cringed. "Yes, Dad?"

"Hey, Bella," called a familiar, husky voice from the driver's side of the little black car.
"Jacob?" I asked, squinting through the rain. Just then, Charlie's cruiser swung around the corner, his
lights shining on the occupants of the car in front of me.
Jacob was already climbing out, his wide grin visible even through the darkness. In the passenger seat
was a much older man, a heavyset man with a memorable face — a face that overflowed, the cheeks
resting against his shoulders, with creases running through the russet skin like an old leather jacket. And
the surprisingly familiar eyes, black eyes that seemed at the same time both too young and too ancient for
the broad face they were set in. Jacob's father, Billy Black. I knew him immediately, though in the more
than five years since I'd seen him last I'd managed to forget his name when Charlie had spoken of him my
first day here. He was staring at me, scrutinizing my face, so I smiled tentatively at him. His eyes were
wide, as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. My smile faded.
Another complication, Edward had said.
Billy still stared at me with intense, anxious eyes. I groaned internally. Had Billy recognized Edward so
easily? Could he really believe the impossible legends his son had scoffed at?
The answer was clear in Billy's eyes. Yes. Yes, he could.

Billy made a face at his son. "And, of course, Jacob was anxious to see Bella again," he added. Jacob
scowled and ducked his head while I fought back a surge of remorse. Maybe I'd been too convincing on
the beach.
"Are you hungry?" I asked, turning toward the kitchen. I was eager to escape Billy's searching gaze.
"Naw, we ate just before we came," Jacob answered.
"How about you, Charlie?" I called over my shoulder as I fled around the corner.
"Sure," he replied, his voice moving in the direction of the front room and the TV. I could hear Billy's
chair follow.
The grilled cheese sandwiches were in the frying pan and I was slicing up a tomato when I sensed
someone behind me.
"So, how are things?" Jacob asked.
"Pretty good." I smiled. His enthusiasm was hard to resist. "How about you? Did you finish your car?"
"No." He frowned. "I still need parts. We borrowed that one." He pointed with his thumb in the direction
of the front yard.
"Sorry. I haven't seen any… what was it you were looking for?"
"Master cylinder." He grinned. "Is something wrong with the truck?" he added suddenly.
"No."
"Oh. I just wondered because you weren't driving it."
I stared down at the pan, pulling up the edge of a sandwich to check the bottom side. "I got a ride with a
friend."
"Nice ride." Jacob's voice was admiring. "I didn't recognize the driver, though. I thought I knew most of
the kids around here."
I nodded noncommittally, keeping my eyes down as I flipped sandwiches.
"My dad seemed to know him from somewhere."
"Jacob, could you hand me some plates? They're in the cupboard over the sink."
"Sure."
He got the plates in silence. I hoped he would let it drop now.
"So who was it?" he asked, setting two plates on the counter next to me.
I sighed in defeat. "Edward Cullen."
To my surprise, he laughed. I glanced up at him. He looked a little embarrassed.
"Guess that explains it, then," he said. "I wondered why my dad was acting so strange."
"That's right." I faked an innocent expression. "He doesn't like the Cullens."

"Superstitious old man," Jacob muttered under his breath.
"You don't think he'd say anything to Charlie?" I couldn't help asking, the words coming out in a low
rush.
Jacob stared at me for a moment, and I couldn't read the expression in his dark eyes. "I doubt it," he
finally answered. "I think Charlie chewed him out pretty good last time. They haven't spoken much since
— tonight is sort of a reunion, I think. I don't think he'd bring it up again."
"Oh," I said, trying to sound indifferent.
I stayed in the front room after I carried the food out to Charlie, pretending to watch the game while
Jacob chattered at me. I was really listening to the men's conversation, watching for any sign that Billy
was about to rat me out, trying to think of ways to stop him if he began.
It was a long night. I had a lot of homework that was going undone, but I was afraid to leave Billy alone
with Charlie. Finally, the game ended.
"Are you and your friends coming back to the beach soon?" Jacob asked as he pushed his father over
the lip of the threshold.
"I'm not sure," I hedged.
"That was fun, Charlie," Billy said.
"Come up for the next game," Charlie encouraged.
"Sure, sure," Billy said. "We'll be here. Have a good night." His eyes shifted to mine, and his smile
disappeared. "You take care, Bella," he added seriously.
"Thanks," I muttered, looking away.
I headed for the stairs while Charlie waved from the doorway.
"Wait, Bella," he said.
I cringed. Had Billy gotten something in before I'd joined them in the living room?
But Charlie was relaxed, still grinning from the unexpected visit.
"I didn't get a chance to talk to you tonight. How was your day?"
"Good." I hesitated with one foot on the first stair, searching for details I could safely share. "My
badminton team won all four games."
"Wow, I didn't know you could play badminton."
"Well, actually I can't, but my partner is really good," I admitted.
"Who is it?" he asked with token interest.
"Um… Mike Newton," I told him reluctantly.
"Oh yeah — you said you were friends with the Newton kid." He perked up. "Nice family." He mused
for a minute. "Why didn't you ask him to the dance this weekend?"

how to bring it up again. He still had his head in his hands.
I tried to speak in a normal voice. "And you have to leave now?"
"Yes." He raised his face; it was serious for a moment, and then his mood shifted and he smiled. "It's
probably for the best. We still have fifteen minutes of that wretched movie left to endure in Biology — I
don't think I could take any more."
I started. Alice — her short, inky hair in a halo of spiky disarray around her exquisite, elfin face — was
suddenly standing behind his shoulder. Her slight frame was willowy, graceful even in absolute stillness.
He greeted her without looking away from me. "Alice."
"Edward," she answered, her high soprano voice almost as attractive as his.
"Alice, Bella — Bella, Alice," he introduced us, gesturing casually with his hand, a wry smile on his face.
"Hello, Bella." Her brilliant obsidian eyes were unreadable, but her smile was friendly. "It's nice to finally
meet you."
Edward flashed a dark look at her.
"Hi, Alice," I murmured shyly.
"Are you ready?" she asked him.
His voice was aloof. "Nearly. I'll meet you at the car."
She left without another word; her walk was so fluid, so sinuous that I felt a sharp pang of jealousy.
"Should I say 'have fun," or is that the wrong sentiment?" I asked, turning back to him.
"No, 'have fun' works as well as anything." He grinned.
"Have fun, then." I worked to sound wholehearted. Of course I didn't fool him.
"I'll try." He still grinned. "And you try to be safe, please."
"Safe in Forks — what a challenge."
"For you it is a challenge." His jaw hardened. "Promise."
"I promise to try to be safe," I recited. "I'll do the laundry tonight — that ought to be fraught with peril."
"Don't fall in," he mocked.
"I'll do my best."
He stood then, and I rose, too.
"I'll see you tomorrow," I sighed.
"It seems like a long time to you, doesn't it?" he mused.
I nodded glumly.
"I'll be there in the morning," he promised, smiling his crooked smile. He reached across the table to

The sound of the truck roaring to life frightened me. I laughed at myself.
When I got home, the handle of the door was locked, the dead bolt unlocked, just as I'd left it this
morning. Inside, I went straight to the laundry room. It looked just the same as I'd left it, too. I dug for
my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I
thought, shaking my head.
Following the same instinct that had prompted me to lie to Mike, I called Jessica on the pretense of
wishing her luck at the dance. When she offered the same wish for my day with Edward, I told her about
the cancellation. She was more disappointed than really necessary for a third-party observer to be. I said
goodbye quickly after that.
Charlie was absentminded at dinner, worried over something at work, I guessed, or maybe a basketball
game, or maybe he was just really enjoying the lasagna — it was hard to tell with Charlie.
"You know, Dad…" I began, breaking into his reverie.
"What's that, Bell?"
"I think you're right about Seattle. I think I'll wait until Jessica or someone else can go with me."
"Oh," he said, surprised. "Oh, okay. So, do you want me to stay home?"
"No, Dad, don't change your plans. I've got a million things to do… homework, laundry… I need to go
to the library and the grocery store. I'll be in and out all day… you go and have fun."
"Are you sure?"
"Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe
three years' supply."
"You're sure easy to live with, Bella." He smiled.
"I could say the same thing about you," I said, laughing. The sound of my laughter was off, but he didn't
seem to notice. I felt so guilty for deceiving him that I almost took Edward's advice and told him where I
would be. Almost.
After dinner, I folded clothes and moved another load through the dryer. Unfortunately it was the kind of
job that only keeps hands busy. My mind definitely had too much free time, and it was getting out of
control. I fluctuated between anticipation so intense that it was very nearly pain, and an insidious fear that
picked at my resolve. I had to keep reminding myself that I'd made my choice, and I wasn't going back
on it. I pulled his note out of my pocket much more often than necessary to absorb the two small words
he'd written. He wants me to be safe, I told myself again and again. I would just hold on to the faith that,
in the end, that desire would win out over the others. And what was my other choice — to cut him out of
my life? Intolerable. Besides, since I'd come to Forks, it really seemed like my life was about him.
But a tiny voice in the back of my mind worried, wondering if it would hurt very much… if it ended
badly.
I was relieved when it was late enough to be acceptable for bedtime. I knew I was far too stressed to
sleep, so I did something I'd never done before. I deliberately took unnecessary cold medicine — the
kind that knocked me out for a good eight hours. I normally wouldn't condone that type of behavior in
myself, but tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on
top of everything else. While I waited for the drugs to kick in, I dried my clean hair till it was impeccably

We were soon out of the town limits, despite his negativity. Thick underbrush and green-swathed trunks
replaced the lawns and houses.
"Turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as I was about to ask. I obeyed silently.
"Now we drive until the pavement ends."
I could hear a smile in his voice, but I was too afraid of driving off the road and proving him right to look
over and be sure.
"And what's there, at the pavement's end?" I wondered.
"A trail."
"We're hiking?" Thank goodness I'd worn tennis shoes.
"Is that a problem?" He sounded as if he'd expected as much.
"No." I tried to make the lie sound confident. But if he thought my truck was slow…
"Don't worry, it's only five miles or so, and we're in no hurry."
Five miles. I didn't answer, so that he wouldn't hear my voice crack in panic. Five miles of treacherous
roots and loose stones, trying to twist my ankles or otherwise incapacitate me. This was going to be
humiliating.
We drove in silence for a while as I contemplated the coming horror.
"What are you thinking?" he asked impatiently after a few moments.
I lied again. "Just wondering where we're going."
"It's a place I like to go when the weather is nice." We both glanced out the windows at the thinning
clouds after he spoke.
"Charlie said it would be warm today."
"And did you tell Charlie what you were up to?" he asked.
"Nope."
"But Jessica thinks we're going to Seattle together?" He seemed cheered by the idea.
"No, I told her you canceled on me — which is true."
"No one knows you're with me?" Angrily, now.
"That depends… I assume you told Alice?"
"That's very helpful, Bella," he snapped.
I pretended I didn't hear that.
"Are you so depressed by Forks that it's made you suicidal?" he demanded when I ignored him.
"You said it might cause trouble for you… us being together publicly," I reminded him.

"It was unquestionably a complication that I couldn't simply read your thoughts to know what your
reaction was to me. I wasn't used to having to go to such circuitous measures, listening to your words in
Jessica's mind… her mind isn't very original, and it was annoying to have to stoop to that. And then I
couldn't know if you really meant what you said. It was all extremely irritating." He frowned at the
memory.
"I wanted you to forget my behavior that first day, if possible, so I tried to talk with you like I would with
any person. I was eager actually, hoping to decipher some of your thoughts. But you were too interesting,
I found myself caught up in your expressions… and every now and then you would stir the air with your
hand or your hair, and the scent would stun me again…
"Of course, then you were nearly crushed to death in front of my eyes. Later I thought of a perfectly
good excuse for why I acted at that moment — because if I hadn't saved you, if your blood had been
spilled there in front of me, I don't think I could have stopped myself from exposing us for what we are.
But I only thought of that excuse later. At the time, all I could think was, "Not her.'"
He closed his eyes, lost in his agonized confession. I listened, more eager than rational. Common sense
told me I should be terrified. Instead, I was relieved to finally understand. And I was filled with
compassion for his suffering, even now, as he confessed his craving to take my life.
I finally was able to speak, though my voice was faint. "In the hospital?"
His eyes flashed up to mine. "I was appalled. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself
in your power — you of all people. As if I needed another motive to kill you." We both flinched as that
word slipped out. "But it had the opposite effect," he continued quickly. "I fought with Rosalie, Emmett,
and Jasper when they suggested that now was the time… the worst fight we've ever had. Carlisle sided
with me, and Alice." He grimaced when he said her name. I couldn't imagine why. "Esme told me to do
whatever I had to in order to stay." He shook his head indulgently.
"All that next day I eavesdropped on the minds of everyone you spoke to, shocked that you kept your
word. I didn't understand you at all. But I knew that I couldn't become more involved with you. I did my
very best to stay as far from you as possible. And every day the perfume of your skin, your breath, your
hair… it hit me as hard as the very first day."
He met my eyes again, and they were surprisingly tender.
"And for all that," he continued, "I'd have fared better if I had exposed us all at that first moment, than if
now, here — with no witnesses and nothing to stop me — I were to hurt you."
I was human enough to have to ask. "Why?"
"Isabella." He pronounced my full name carefully, then playfully ruffled my hair with his free hand. A
shock ran through my body at his casual touch. "Bella, I couldn't live with myself if I ever hurt you. You
don't know how it's tortured me." He looked down, ashamed again. "The thought of you, still, white,
cold… to never see you blush scarlet again, to never see that flash of intuition in your eyes when you see
through my pretenses… it would be unendurable." He lifted his glorious, agonized eyes to mine. "You are
the most important thing to me now. The most important thing to me ever."
My head was spinning at the rapid change in direction our conversation had taken. From the cheerful
topic of my impending demise, we were suddenly declaring ourselves. He waited, and even though I
looked down to study our hands between us, I knew his golden eyes were on me. "You already know
how I feel, of course," I finally said. "I'm here… which, roughly translated, means I would rather die than
stay away from you." I frowned. "I'm an idiot."

"You are an idiot," he agreed with a laugh. Our eyes met, and I laughed, too. We laughed together at the
idiocy and sheer impossibility of such a moment.
"And so the lion fell in love with the lamb…" he murmured. I looked away, hiding my eyes as I thrilled to
the word.
"What a stupid lamb," I sighed.
"What a sick, masochistic lion." He stared into the shadowy forest for a long moment, and I wondered
where his thoughts had taken him.
"Why… ?" I began, and then paused, not sure how to continue.
He looked at me and smiled; sunlight glinted off his face, his teeth.
"Yes?"
"Tell me why you ran from me before."
His smile faded. "You know why."
"No, I mean, exactly what did I do wrong? I'll have to be on my guard, you see, so I better start learning
what I shouldn't do. This, for example" — I stroked the back of his hand — "seems to be all right."
He smiled again. "You didn't do anything wrong, Bella. It was my fault."
"But I want to help, if I can, to not make this harder for you."
"Well…" He contemplated for a moment. "It was just how close you were. Most humans instinctively shy
away from us, are repelled by our alienness… I wasn't expecting you to come so close. And the smell of
your throat." He stopped short, looking to see if he'd upset me.
"Okay, then," I said flippantly, trying to alleviate the suddenly tense atmosphere. I tucked my chin. "No
throat exposure."
It worked; he laughed. "No, really, it was more the surprise than anything else."
He raised his free hand and placed it gently on the side of my neck. I sat very still, the chill of his touch a
natural warning — a warning telling me to be terrified. But there was no feeling of fear in me. There were,
however, other feelings…
"You see," he said. "Perfectly fine."
My blood was racing, and I wished I could slow it, sensing that this must make everything so much more
difficult — the thudding of my pulse in my veins. Surely he could hear it.
"The blush on your cheeks is lovely," he murmured. He gently freed his other hand. My hands fell limply
into my lap. Softly he brushed my cheek, then held my face between his marble hands.
"Be very still," he whispered, as if I wasn't already frozen.
Slowly, never moving his eyes from mine, he leaned toward me. Then abruptly, but very gently, he rested
his cold cheek against the hollow at the base of my throat. I was quite unable to move, even if I'd wanted
to. I listened to the sound of his even breathing, watching the sun and wind play in his bronze hair, more
human than any other part of him.

I waited to see if he was kidding, but, apparently, he meant it. He smiled as he read my hesitation, and
reached for me. My heart reacted; even though he couldn't hear my thoughts, my pulse always gave me
away. He then proceeded to sling me onto his back, with very little effort on my part, besides, when in
place, clamping my legs and arms so tightly around him that it would choke a normal person. It was like
clinging to a stone.
"I'm a bit heavier than your average backpack," I warned.
"Hah!" he snorted. I could almost hear his eyes rolling. I'd never seen him in such high spirits before.
He startled me, suddenly grabbing my hand, pressing my palm to his face, and inhaling deeply.
"Easier all the time," he muttered.
And then he was running.
If I'd ever feared death before in his presence, it was nothing compared to how I felt now.
He streaked through the dark, thick underbrush of the forest like a bullet, like a ghost. There was no
sound, no evidence that his feet touched the earth. His breathing never changed, never indicated any
effort. But the trees flew by at deadly speeds, always missing us by inches.
I was too terrified to close my eyes, though the cool forest air whipped against my face and burned them.
I felt as if I were stupidly sticking my head out the window of an airplane in flight. And, for the first time in
my life, I felt the dizzy faintness of motion sickness.
Then it was over. We'd hiked hours this morning to reach Edward's meadow, and now, in a matter of
minutes, we were back to the truck.
"Exhilarating, isn't it?" His voice was high, excited.
He stood motionless, waiting for me to climb down. I tried, but my muscles wouldn't respond. My arms
and legs stayed locked around him while my head spun uncomfortably.
"Bella?" he asked, anxious now.
"I think I need to lie down," I gasped.
"Oh, sorry." He waited for me, but I still couldn't move.
"I think I need help," I admitted.
He laughed quietly, and gently unloosened my stranglehold on his neck. There was no resisting the iron
strength of his hands. Then he pulled me around to face him, cradling me in his arms like a small child. He
held me for a moment, then carefully placed me on the springy ferns.
"How do you feel?" he asked.
I couldn't be sure how I felt when my head was spinning so crazily. "Dizzy, I think."
"Put your head between your knees."
I tried that, and it helped a little. I breathed in and out slowly, keeping my head very still. I felt him sitting
beside me. The moments passed, and eventually I found that I could raise my head. There was a hollow
ringing sound in my ears.

"I guess that wasn't the best idea," he mused.
I tried to be positive, but my voice was weak. "No, it was very interesting."
"Hah! You're as white as a ghost — no, you're as white as me!"
"I think I should have closed my eyes."
"Remember that next time."
"Next time!" I groaned.
He laughed, his mood still radiant.
"Show-off," I muttered.
"Open your eyes, Bella," he said quietly.
And he was right there, his face so close to mine. His beauty stunned my mind — it was too much, an
excess I couldn't grow accustomed to.
"I was thinking, while I was running…" He paused.
"About not hitting the trees, I hope."
"Silly Bella," he chuckled. "Running is second nature to me, it's not something I have to think about."
"Show-off," I muttered again.
He smiled.
"No," he continued, "I was thinking there was something I wanted to try." And he took my face in his
hands again.
I couldn't breathe.
He hesitated — not in the normal way, the human way.
Not the way a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how he would
be received. Perhaps he would hesitate to prolong the moment, that ideal moment of anticipation,
sometimes better than the kiss itself.
Edward hesitated to test himself, to see if this was safe, to make sure he was still in control of his need.
And then his cold, marble lips pressed very softly against mine.
What neither of us was prepared for was my response.
Blood boiled under my skin, burned in my lips. My breath came in a wild gasp. My fingers knotted in his
hair, clutching him to me. My lips parted as I breathed in his heady scent.
Immediately I felt him turn to unresponsive stone beneath my lips. His hands gently, but with irresistible
force, pushed my face back. I opened my eyes and saw his guarded expression.
"Oops," I breathed.

"That's an understatement."
His eyes were wild, his jaw clenched in acute restraint, yet he didn't lapse from his perfect articulation.
He held my face just inches from his. He dazzled my eyes.
"Should I… ?" I tried to disengage myself, to give him some room.
His hands refused to let me move so much as an inch.
"No, it's tolerable. Wait for a moment, please." His voice was polite, controlled.
I kept my eyes on his, watched as the excitement in them faded and gentled.
Then he smiled a surprisingly impish grin.
"There," he said, obviously pleased with himself.
"Tolerable?" I asked.
He laughed aloud. "I'm stronger than I thought. It's nice to know."
"I wish I could say the same. I'm sorry."
"You are only human, after all."
"Thanks so much," I said, my voice acerbic.
He was on his feet in one of his lithe, almost invisibly quick movements. He held out his hand to me, an
unexpected gesture. I was so used to our standard of careful non-contact. I took his icy hand, needing
the support more than I thought. My balance had not yet returned.
"Are you still faint from the run? Or was it my kissing expertise?" How lighthearted, how human he
seemed as he laughed now, his seraphic face untroubled. He was a different Edward than the one I had
known. And I felt all the more besotted by him. It would cause me physical pain to be separated from
him now.
"I can't be sure, I'm still woozy," I managed to respond. "I think it's some of both, though."
"Maybe you should let me drive."
"Are you insane?" I protested.
"I can drive better than you on your best day," he teased. "You have much slower reflexes."
"I'm sure that's true, but I don't think my nerves, or my truck, could take it."
"Some trust, please, Bella."
My hand was in my pocket, curled tightly around the key. I pursed my lips, deliberated, then shook my
head with a tight grin.
"Nope. Not a chance."
He raised his eyebrows in disbelief.
I started to step around him, heading for the driver's side. He might have let me pass if I hadn't wobbled

slightly. Then again, he might not have. His arm created an inescapable snare around my waist.
"Bella, I've already expended a great deal of personal effort at this point to keep you alive. I'm not about
to let you behind the wheel of a vehicle when you can't even walk straight. Besides, friends don't let
friends drive drunk," he quoted with a chuckle. I could smell the unbearably sweet fragrance coming off
his chest.
"Drunk?" I objected.
"You're intoxicated by my very presence." He was grinning that playful smirk again.
"I can't argue with that," I sighed. There was no way around it; I couldn't resist him in anything. I held the
key high and dropped it, watching his hand flash like lightning to catch it soundlessly. "Take it easy — my
truck is a senior citizen."
"Very sensible," he approved.
"And are you not affected at all?" I asked, irked. "By my presence?"
Again his mobile features transformed, his expression became soft, warm. He didn't answer at first; he
simply bent his face to mine, and brushed his lips slowly along my jaw, from my ear to my chin, back and
forth. I trembled.
"Regardless," he finally murmured, "I have better reflexes."

"Should your father know I'm here?" he asked.
"I'm not sure…" I tried to think it through quickly.
"Another time then…"
And I was alone.
"Edward!" I hissed.
I heard a ghostly chuckle, then nothing else.
My father's key turned in the door.
"Bella?" he called. It had bothered me before; who else would it be? Suddenly he didn't seem so far off
base.
"In here." I hoped he couldn't hear the hysterical edge to my voice. I grabbed my dinner from the
microwave and sat at the table as he walked in. His footsteps sounded so noisy after my day with
Edward.
"Can you get me some of that? I'm bushed." He stepped on the heels of his boots to take them off,
holding the back of Edward's chair for support.
I took my food with me, scarfing it down as I got his dinner. It burned my tongue. I filled two glasses with
milk while his lasagna was heating, and gulped mine to put out the fire. As I set the glass down, I noticed
the milk trembling and realized my hand was shaking. Charlie sat in the chair, and the contrast between
him and its former occupant was comical.
"Thanks," he said as I placed his food on the table.
"How was your day?" I asked. The words were rushed; I was dying to escape to my room.
"Good. The fish were biting… how about you? Did you get everything done that you wanted to?"
"Not really — it was too nice out to stay indoors." I took another big bite.
"It was a nice day," he agreed. What an understatement, I thought to myself.
Finished with the last bite of lasagna, I lifted my glass and chugged the remains of my milk.
Charlie surprised me by being observant. "In a hurry?"
"Yeah, I'm tired. I'm going to bed early."
"You look kinda keyed up," he noted. Why, oh why, did this have to be his night to pay attention?
"Do I?" was all I could manage in response. I quickly scrubbed my dishes clean in the sink, and placed
them upside down on a dish towel to dry.
"It's Saturday," he mused.
I didn't respond.
"No plans tonight?" he asked suddenly.

"Stay," I said, trying to look severe.
"Yes, ma'am." And he made a show of becoming a statue on the edge of my bed.
I hopped up, grabbing my pajamas from off the floor, my bag of toiletries off the desk. I left the light off
and slipped out, closing the door.
I could hear the sound from the TV rising up the stairs. I banged the bathroom door loudly, so Charlie
wouldn't come up to bother me.
I meant to hurry. I brushed my teeth fiercely, trying to be thorough and speedy, removing all traces of
lasagna. But the hot water of the shower couldn't be rushed. It unknotted the muscles in my back, calmed
my pulse. The familiar smell of my shampoo made me feel like I might be the same person I had been this
morning. I tried not to think of Edward, sitting in my room, waiting, because then I had to start all over
with the calming process. Finally, I couldn't delay anymore. I shut off the water, toweling hastily, rushing
again. I pulled on my holey t-shirt and gray sweatpants. Too late to regret not packing the Victoria's
Secret silk pajamas my mother got me two birthdays ago, which still had the tags on them in a drawer
somewhere back home.
I rubbed the towel through my hair again, and then yanked the brush through it quickly. I threw the towel
in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie
could see that I was in my pajamas, with wet hair.
"'Night, Dad."
"'Night, Bella." He did look startled by my appearance. Maybe that would keep him from checking on
me tonight.
I took the stairs two at a time, trying to be quiet, and flew into my room, closing the door tightly behind
me.
Edward hadn't moved a fraction of an inch, a carving of Adonis perched on my faded quilt. I smiled, and
his lips twitched, the statue coming to life.
His eyes appraised me, taking in the damp hair, the tattered shirt. He raised one eyebrow. "Nice."
I grimaced.
"No, it looks good on you."
"Thanks," I whispered. I went back to his side, sitting cross-legged beside him. I looked at the lines in the
wooden floor.
"What was all that for?"
"Charlie thinks I'm sneaking out."
"Oh." He contemplated that. "Why?" As if he couldn't know Charlie's mind much more clearly than I
could guess.
"Apparently, I look a little overexcited."
He lifted my chin, examining my face.
"You look very warm, actually."

"We have tomorrow, and the next day, and the next…" he reminded me. I smiled, euphoric at the
thought.
"Are you sure you won't vanish in the morning?" I wanted this to be certain. "You are mythical, after all."
"I won't leave you." His voice had the seal of a promise in it.
"One more, then, tonight…" And I blushed. The darkness was no help — I'm sure he could feel the
sudden warmth under my skin.
"What is it?"
"No, forget it. I changed my mind."
"Bella, you can ask me anything."
I didn't answer, and he groaned.
"I keep thinking it will get less frustrating, not hearing your thoughts. But it just gets worse and worse."
"I'm glad you can't read my thoughts. It's bad enough that you eavesdrop on my sleep-talking."
"Please?" His voice was so persuasive, so impossible to resist.
I shook my head.
"If you don't tell me, I'll just assume it's something much worse than it is," he threatened darkly. "Please?"
Again, that pleading voice.
"Well," I began, glad that he couldn't see my face.
"Yes?"
"You said that Rosalie and Emmett will get married soon… Is that… marriage… the same as it is for
humans?"
He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you're getting at?"
I fidgeted, unable to answer.
"Yes, I suppose it is much the same," he said. "I told you, most of those human desires are there, just
hidden behind more powerful desires."
"Oh," was all I could say.
"Was there a purpose behind your curiosity?"
"Well, I did wonder… about you and me… someday…"
He was instantly serious, I could tell by the sudden stillness of his body. I froze, too, reacting
automatically.
"I don't think that… that… would be possible for us."
"Because it would be too hard for you, if I were that… close?"

"That's certainly a problem. But that's not what I was thinking of. It's just that you are so soft, so fragile. I
have to mind my actions every moment that we're together so that I don't hurt you. I could kill you quite
easily, Bella, simply by accident." His voice had become just a soft murmur. He moved his icy palm to
rest it against my cheek. "If I was too hasty… if for one second I wasn't paying enough attention, I could
reach out, meaning to touch your face, and crush your skull by mistake. You don't realize how incredibly
breakable you are. I can never, never afford to lose any kind of control when I'm with you."
He waited for me to respond, growing anxious when I didn't. "Are you scared?" he asked.
I waited for a minute to answer, so the words would be true. "No. I'm fine."
He seemed to deliberate for a moment. "I'm curious now, though," he said, his voice light again. "Have
you ever… ?" He trailed off suggestively.
"Of course not." I flushed. "I told you I've never felt like this about anyone before, not even close."
"I know. It's just that I know other people's thoughts. I know love and lust don't always keep the same
company."
"They do for me. Now, anyway, that they exist for me at all," I sighed.
"That's nice. We have that one thing in common, at least." He sounded satisfied.
"Your human instincts…" I began. He waited. "Well, do you find me attractive, in that way, at all?"
He laughed and lightly rumpled my nearly dry hair.
"I may not be a human, but I am a man," he assured me.
I yawned involuntarily.
"I've answered your questions, now you should sleep," he insisted.
"I'm not sure if I can."
"Do you want me to leave?"
"No!" I said too loudly.
He laughed, and then began to hum that same, unfamiliar lullaby; the voice of an archangel, soft in my ear.
More tired than I realized, exhausted from the long day of mental and emotional stress like I'd never felt
before, I drifted to sleep in his cold arms.

"It was nice to hear, just the same."
I hid my face against his shoulder.
"I love you," I whispered.
"You are my life now," he answered simply.
There was nothing more to say for the moment. He rocked us back and forth as the room grew lighter.
"Breakfast time," he said eventually, casually — to prove, I'm sure, that he remembered all my human
frailties.
So I clutched my throat with both hands and stared at him with wide eyes. Shock crossed his face.
"Kidding!" I snickered. "And you said I couldn't act!"
He frowned in disgust. "That wasn't funny."
"It was very funny, and you know it." But I examined his gold eyes carefully, to make sure that I was
forgiven. Apparently, I was.
"Shall I rephrase?" he asked. "Breakfast time for the human."
"Oh, okay."
He threw me over his stone shoulder, gently, but with a swiftness that left me breathless. I protested as he
carried me easily down the stairs, but he ignored me. He sat me right side up on a chair.
The kitchen was bright, happy, seeming to absorb my mood.
"What's for breakfast?" I asked pleasantly.
That threw him for a minute.
"Er, I'm not sure. What would you like?" His marble brow puckered.
I grinned, hopping up.
"That's all right, I fend for myself pretty well. Watch me hunt."
I found a bowl and a box of cereal. I could feel his eyes on me as I poured the milk and grabbed a
spoon. I sat my food on the table, and then paused.
"Can I get you anything?" I asked, not wanting to be rude.
He rolled his eyes. "Just eat, Bella."
I sat at the table, watching him as I took a bite. He was gazing at me, studying my every movement. It
made me self-conscious. I cleared my mouth to speak, to distract him.
"What's on the agenda for today?" I asked.
"Hmmm…" I watched him frame his answer carefully. "What would you say to meeting my family?"
I gulped.

"Bella?" His voice was alarmed as he caught me and held me up.
"You… made… me… faint," I accused him dizzily.
"What am I going to do with you?" he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you attack
me! Today you pass out on me!"
I laughed weakly, letting his arms support me while my head spun.
"So much for being good at everything," he sighed.
"That's the problem." I was still dizzy. "You're too good. Far, far too good."
"Do you feel sick?" he asked; he'd seen me like this before.
"No — that wasn't the same kind of fainting at all. I don't know what happened." I shook my head
apologeticallv, "I think I forgot to breathe."
"I can't take you anywhere like this."
"I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to think I'm insane anyway, what's the difference?"
He measured my expression for a moment. "I'm very partial to that color with your skin," he offered
unexpectedly. I flushed with pleasure, and looked away.
"Look, I'm trying really hard not to think about what I'm about to do, so can we go already?" I asked.
"And you're worried, not because you're headed to meet a houseful of vampires, but because you think
those vampires won't approve of you, correct?"
"That's right," I answered immediately, hiding my surprise at his casual use of the word.
He shook his head. "You're incredible."
I realized, as he drove my truck out of the main part of town, that I had no idea where he lived. We
passed over the bridge at the Calawah River, the road winding northward, the houses flashing past us
growing farther apart, getting bigger. And then we were past the other houses altogether, driving through
misty forest. I was trying to decide whether to ask or be patient, when he turned abruptly onto an
unpaved road. It was unmarked, barely visible among the ferns. The forest encroached on both sides,
leaving the road ahead only discernible for a few meters as it twisted, serpentlike, around the ancient
trees.
And then, after a few miles, there was some thinning of the woods, and we were suddenly in a small
meadow, or was it actually a lawn? The gloom of the forest didn't relent, though, for there were six
primordial cedars that shaded an entire acre with their vast sweep of branches. The trees held their
protecting shadow right up to the walls of the house that rose among them, making obsolete the deep
porch that wrapped around the first story.
I don't know what I had expected, but it definitely wasn't this. The house was timeless, graceful, and
probably a hundred years old. It was painted a soft, faded white, three stories tall, rectangular and well
proportioned. The windows and doors were either part of the original structure or a perfect restoration.
My truck was the only car in sight. I could hear the river close by, hidden in the obscurity of the forest.
"Wow."

"You like it?" He smiled.
"It… has a certain charm."
He pulled the end of my ponytail and chuckled.
"Ready?" he asked, opening my door.
"Not even a little bit — let's go." I tried to laugh, but it seemed to get stuck in my throat. I smoothed my
hair nervously.
"You look lovely." He took my hand easily, without thinking about it.
We walked through the deep shade up to the porch. I knew he could feel my tension; his thumb rubbed
soothing circles into the back of my hand.
He opened the door for me.
The inside was even more surprising, less predictable, than the exterior. It was very bright, very open,
and very large. This must have originally been several rooms, but the walls had been removed from most
of the first floor to create one wide space. The back, south-facing wall had been entirely replaced with
glass, and, beyond the shade of the cedars, the lawn stretched bare to the wide river. A massive curving
staircase dominated the west side of the room. The walls, the high-beamed ceiling, the wooden floors,
and the thick carpets were all varying shades of white.
Waiting to greet us, standing just to the left of the door, on a raised portion of the floor by a spectacular
grand piano, were Edward's parents.
I'd seen Dr. Cullen before, of course, yet I couldn't help but be struck again by his youth, his outrageous
perfection. At his side was Esme, I assumed, the only one of the family I'd never seen before. She had
the same pale, beautiful features as the rest of them. Something about her heart-shaped face, her billows
of soft, caramel-colored hair, reminded me of the ingénues of the silent-movie era. She was small,
slender, yet less angular, more rounded than the others. They were both dressed casually, in light colors
that matched the inside of the house. They smiled in welcome, but made no move to approach us. Trying
not to frighten me, I guessed.
"Carlisle, Esme," Edward's voice broke the short silence, "this is Bella."
"You're very welcome, Bella." Carlisle's step was measured, careful as he approached me. He raised his
hand tentatively, and I stepped forward to shake hands with him.
"It's nice to see you again, Dr. Cullen."
"Please, call me Carlisle."
"Carlisle." I grinned at him, my sudden confidence surprising me. I could feel Edward's relief at my side.
Esme smiled and stepped forward as well, reaching for my hand. Her cold, stone grasp was just as I
expected.
"It's very nice to know you," she said sincerely.
"Thank you. I'm glad to meet you, too." And I was. It was like meeting a fairy tale — Snow White, in the
flesh.

"Where are Alice and Jasper?" Edward asked, but no one answered, as they had just appeared at the
top of the wide staircase.
"Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the stairs, a streak of black hair and white
skin, coming to a sudden and graceful stop in front of me. Carlisle and Esme shot warning glances at her,
but I liked it. It was natural — for her, anyway.
"Hi, Bella!" Alice said, and she bounced forward to kiss my cheek. If Carlisle and Esme had looked
cautious before, they now looked staggered. There was shock in my eyes, too, but I was also very
pleased that she seemed to approve of me so entirely. I was startled to feel Edward stiffen at my side. I
glanced at his face, but his expression was unreadable.
"You do smell nice, I never noticed before," she commented, to my extreme embarrassment.
No one else seemed to know quite what to say, and then Jasper was there — tall and leonine. A feeling
of ease spread through me, and I was suddenly comfortable despite where I was. Edward stared at
Jasper, raising one eyebrow, and I remembered what Jasper could do.
"Hello, Bella," Jasper said. He kept his distance, not offering to shake my hand. But it was impossible to
feel awkward near him.
"Hello, Jasper." I smiled at him shyly, and then at the others. "It's nice to meet you all — you have a very
beautiful home," I added conventionally.
"Thank you," Esme said. "We're so glad that you came." She spoke with feeling, and I realized that she
thought I was brave.
I also realized that Rosalie and Emmett were nowhere to be seen, and I remembered Edward's
too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if the others didn't like me.
Carlisle's expression distracted me from this train of thought; he was gazing meaningfully at Edward with
an intense expression. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Edward nod once.
I looked away, trying to be polite. My eyes wandered again to the beautiful instrument on the platform by
the door. I suddenly remembered my childhood fantasy that, should I ever win a lottery, I would buy a
grand piano for my mother. She wasn't really good — she only played for herself on our secondhand
upright — but I loved to watch her play. She was happy, absorbed — she seemed like a new,
mysterious being to me then, someone outside the "mom" persona I took for granted. She'd put me
through lessons, of course, but like most kids, I whined until she let me quit.
Esme noticed my preoccupation.
"Do you play?" she asked, inclining her head toward the piano.
I shook my head. "Not at all. But it's so beautiful. Is it yours?"
"No," she laughed. "Edward didn't tell you he was musical?"
"No." I glared at his suddenly innocent expression with narrowed eyes. "I should have known, I guess."
Esme raised her delicate eyebrows in confusion.
"Edward can do everything, right?" I explained.
Jasper snickered and Esme gave Edward a reproving look.

He led me back to the room that he'd pointed out as Carlisle's office. He paused outside the door for an
instant.
"Come in," Carlisle's voice invited.
Edward opened the door to a high-ceilinged room with tall, west-facing windows. The walls were
paneled again, in a darker wood — where they were visible. Most of the wall space was taken up by
towering bookshelves that reached high above my head and held more books than I'd ever seen outside
a library.
Carlisle sat behind a huge mahogany desk in a leather chair. He was just placing a bookmark in the pages
of the thick volume he held. The room was how I'd always imagined a college dean's would look — only
Carlisle looked too young to fit the part.
"What can I do for you?" he asked us pleasantly, rising from his seat.
"I wanted to show Bella some of our history," Edward said. "Well, your history, actually."
"We didn't mean to disturb you," I apologized.
"Not at all. Where are you going to start?"
"The Waggoner," Edward replied, placing one hand lightly on my shoulder and spinning me around to

"So he grew very hungry, and eventually weak. He strayed as far as he could from the human populace,
recognizing that his willpower was weakening, too. For months he wandered by night, seeking the
loneliest places, loathing himself.
"One night, a herd of deer passed his hiding place. He was so wild with thirst that he attacked without a
thought. His strength returned and he realized there was an alternative to being the vile monster he feared.
Had he not eaten venison in his former life? Over the next months his new philosophy was born. He
could exist without being a demon. He found himself again.
"He began to make better use of his time. He'd always been intelligent, eager to learn. Now he had
unlimited time before him. He studied by night, planned by day. He swam to France and —"
"He swam to France?"
"People swim the Channel all the time, Bella," he reminded me patiently.
"That's true, I guess. It just sounded funny in that context. Go on."
"Swimming is easy for us —"
"Everything is easy for you," I griped.
He waited, his expression amused.
"I won't interrupt again, I promise."
He chuckled darkly, and finished his sentence. "Because, technically, we don't need to breathe."
"You —"
"No, no, you promised." He laughed, putting his cold finger lightly to my lips. "Do you want to hear the
story or not?"
"You can't spring something like that on me, and then expect me not to say anything," I mumbled against
his finger.
He lifted his hand, moving it to rest against my neck. The speed of my heart reacted to that, but I
persisted.
"You don't have to breathe?" I demanded.
"No, it's not necessary. Just a habit." He shrugged.
"How long can you go… without breathing?"
"Indefinitely, I suppose; I don't know. It gets a bit uncomfortable — being without a sense of smell."
"A bit uncomfortable," I echoed.
I wasn't paying attention to my own expression, but something in it made him grow somber. His hand
dropped to his side and he stood very still, his eyes intent on my face. The silence lengthened. His
features were immobile as stone.
"What is it?" I whispered, touching his frozen face.
His face softened under my hand, and he sighed. "I keep waiting for it to happen."

"You wouldn't."
I didn't see him leap at me — it was much too fast. I only found myself suddenly airborne, and then we
crashed onto the sofa, knocking it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection
around me — I was barely jostled. But I still was gasping as I tried to right myself.
He wasn't having that. He curled me into a ball against his chest, holding me more securely than iron
chains. I glared at him in alarm, but he seemed well in control, his jaw relaxed as he grinned, his eyes
bright only with humor.
"You were saying?" he growled playfully.
"That you are a very, very terrifying monster," I said, my sarcasm marred a bit by my breathless voice.
"Much better," he approved.
"Um." I struggled. "Can I get up now?"
He just laughed.
"Can we come in?" a soft voice sounded from the hall.
I struggled to free myself, but Edward merely readjusted me so that I was somewhat more conventionally
seated on his lap. I could see it was Alice, then, and Jasper behind her in the doorway. My cheeks
burned, but Edward seemed at ease.
"Go ahead." Edward was still chuckling quietly.
Alice seemed to find nothing unusual in our embrace; she walked — almost danced, her movements
were so graceful — to the center of the room, where she folded herself sinuously onto the floor. Jasper,
however, paused at the door, his expression a trifle shocked. He stared at Edward's face, and I
wondered if he was tasting the atmosphere with his unusual sensitivity.
"It sounded like you were having Bella for lunch, and we came to see if you would share," Alice
announced.
I stiffened for an instant, until I realized Edward was grinning — whether at her comment or my response,
I couldn't tell.
"Sorry, I don't believe I have enough to spare," he replied, his arms holding me recklessly close.
"Actually," Jasper said, smiling despite himself as he walked into the room, "Alice says there's going to be
a real storm tonight, and Emmett wants to play ball. Are you game?"
The words were all common enough, but the context confused me. I gathered that Alice was a bit more
reliable than the weatherman, though.
Edward's eyes lit up, but he hesitated.
"Of course you should bring Bella," Alice chirped. I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance at her.
"Do you want to go?" Edward asked me, excited, his expression vivid.
"Sure." I couldn't disappoint such a face. "Um, where are we going?"

"Jake," he said, still appraising me. "Why don't you go get that new picture of Rebecca out of the car? I'll
leave that for Charlie, too."
"Where is it?" Jacob asked, his voice morose. I glanced at him, but he was staring at the floor, his
eyebrows pulling together.
"I think I saw it in the trunk," Billy said. "You may have to dig for it."
Jacob slouched back out into the rain.
Billy and I faced each other in silence. After a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned
and headed to the kitchen. I could hear his wet wheels squeak against the linoleum as he followed.
I shoved the bag onto the crowded top shelf of the fridge, and spun around to confront him. His deeply
lined face was unreadable.
"Charlie won't be back for a long time." My voice was almost rude.
He nodded in agreement, but said nothing.
"Thanks again for the fish fry," I hinted.
He continued nodding. I sighed and folded my arms across my chest.
He seemed to sense that I had given up on small talk. "Bella," he said, and then he hesitated.
I waited.
"Bella," he said again, "Charlie is one of my best friends."
"Yes."
He spoke each word carefully in his rumbling voice. "I noticed you've been spending time with one of the
Cullens."
"Yes," I repeated curtly.
His eyes narrowed. "Maybe it's none of my business, but I don't think that is such a good idea."
"You're right," I agreed. "It is none of your business."
He raised his graying eyebrows at my tone. "You probably don't know this, but the Cullen family has an
unpleasant reputation on the reservation."
"Actually, I did know that," I informed him in a hard voice. This surprised him. "But that reputation
couldn't be deserved, could it? Because the Cullens never set foot on the reservation, do they?" I could
see that my less than subtle reminder of the agreement that both bound and protected his tribe pulled him
up short.
"That's true," he acceded, his eyes guarded. "You seem… well informed about the Cullens. More
informed than I expected."
I stared him down. "Maybe even better informed than you are."
He pursed his thick lips as he considered that. "Maybe." he allowed, but his eyes were shrewd. "Is
Charlie as well informed?"

He had found the weak chink in my armor.
"Charlie likes the Cullens a lot," I hedged. He clearly understood my evasion. His expression was
unhappy, but unsurprised.
"It's not my business," he said. "But it may be Charlie's."
"Though it would be my business, again, whether or not I think that it's Charlie's business, right?"
I wondered if he even understood my confused question as I struggled not to say anything compromising.
But he seemed to. He thought about it while the rain picked up against the roof, the only sound breaking
the silence.
"Yes," he finally surrendered. "I guess that's your business, too."
I sighed with relief. "Thanks, Billy."
"Just think about what you're doing, Bella," he urged.
"Okay," I agreed quickly.
He frowned. "What I meant to say was, don't do what you're doing."
I looked into his eyes, filled with nothing but concern for me, and there was nothing I could say.
Just then the front door banged loudly, and I jumped at the sound.
"There's no picture anywhere in that car." Jacob's complaining voice reached us before he did. The
shoulders of his shirt were stained with the rain, his hair dripping, when he rounded the corner.
"Hmm," Billy grunted, suddenly detached, spinning his chair around to face his son. "I guess I left it at
home."
Jacob rolled his eyes dramatically. "Great."
"Well, Bella, tell Charlie" — Billy paused before continuing — "that we stopped by, I mean."
"I will," I muttered.
Jacob was surprised. "Are we leaving already?"
"Charlie's gonna be out late," Billy explained as he rolled himself past Jacob.
"Oh." Jacob looked disappointed. "Well, I guess I'll see you later, then, Bella."
"Sure," I agreed.
"Take care," Billy warned me. I didn't answer.
Jacob helped his father out the door. I waved briefly, glancing swiftly toward my now-empty truck, and
then shut the door before they were gone.
I stood in the hallway for a minute, listening to the sound of their car as it backed out and drove away. I
stayed where I was, waiting for the irritation and anxiety to subside. When the tension eventually faded a
bit, I headed upstairs to change out of my dressy clothes.

I tried on a couple of different tops, not sure what to expect tonight. As I concentrated on what was
coming, what had just passed became insignificant. Now that I was removed from Jasper's and Edward's
influence, I began to make up for not being terrified before. I gave up quickly on choosing an outfit —
throwing on an old flannel shirt and jeans — knowing I would be in my raincoat all night anyway.
The phone rang and I sprinted downstairs to get it. There was only one voice I wanted to hear; anything
else would be a disappointment. But I knew that if he wanted to talk to me, he'd probably just
materialize in my room.
"Hello?" I asked, breathless.
"Bella? It's me," Jessica said.
"Oh, hey, Jess." I scrambled for a moment to come back down to reality. It felt like months rather than
days since I'd spoken to Jess. "How was the dance?"
"It was so much fun!" Jessica gushed. Needing no more invitation than that, she launched into a
minute-by-minute account of the previous night. I mmm'd and ahh'd at the right places, but it wasn't easy
to concentrate. Jessica, Mike, the dance, the school — they all seemed strangely irrelevant at the
moment. My eyes kept flashing to the window, trying to judge the degree of light behind the heavy
clouds.
"Did you hear what I said, Bella?" Jess asked, irritated.
"I'm sorry, what?"
"I said, Mike kissed me! Can you believe it?"
"That's wonderful, Jess," I said.
"So what did you do yesterday?" Jessica challenged, still sounding bothered by my lack of attention. Or
maybe she was upset because I hadn't asked for details.
"Nothing, really. I just hung around outside to enjoy the sun."
I heard Charlie's car in the garage.
"Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?"
The front door slammed and I could hear Charlie banging around under the stairs, putting his tackle
away.
"Um." I hesitated, not sure what my story was anymore.
"Hi there, kiddo!" Charlie called as he walked into the kitchen. I waved at him.
Jess heard his voice. "Oh, your dad's there. Never mind — we'll talk tomorrow. See you in Trig."
"See ya, Jess." I hung up the phone.
"Hey, Dad," I said. He was scrubbing his hands in the sink. "Where's the fish?"
"I put it out in the freezer."
"I'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze — Billy dropped off some of Harry Clearwater's fish fry this

Then something sunk in.
"Run the whole way? As in, we're still going to run part of the way?" My voice edged up a few octaves.
He grinned tightly. "You're not going to run."
"I'm going to be sick."
"Keep your eyes closed, you'll be fine."
I bit my lip, fighting the panic.
He leaned over to kiss the top of my head, and then groaned. I looked at him, puzzled.
"You smell so good in the rain," he explained.
"In a good way, or in a bad way?" I asked cautiously.
He sighed. "Both, always both."
I don't know how he found his way in the gloom and downpour, but he somehow found a side road that
was less of a road and more of a mountain path. For a long while conversation was impossible, because I
was bouncing up and down on the seat like a jackhammer. He seemed to enjoy the ride, though, smiling
hugely the whole way.
And then we came to the end of the road; the trees formed green walls on three sides of the Jeep. The
rain was a mere drizzle, slowing every second, the sky brighter through the clouds.
"Sorry, Bella, we have to go on foot from here."
"You know what? I'll just wait here."
"What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning."
"I haven't forgotten the last time yet." Could it have been only yesterday?
He was around to my side of the car in a blur. He started unbuckling me.
"I'll get those, you go on ahead," I protested.
"Hmmm…" he mused as he quickly finished. "It seems I'm going to have to tamper with your memory."
Before I could react, he pulled me from the Jeep and set my feet on the ground. It was barely misting
now; Alice was going to be right.
"Tamper with my memory?" I asked nervously.
"Something like that." He was watching me intently, carefully, but there was humor deep in his eyes. He
placed his hands against the Jeep on either side of my head and leaned forward, forcing me to press back
against the door. He leaned in even closer, his face inches from mine. I had no room to escape.
"Now," he breathed, and just his smell disturbed my thought processes, "what exactly are you worrying
about?"
"Well, um, hitting a tree —" I gulped "— and dying. And then getting sick."

He fought back a smile. Then he bent his head down and touched his cold lips softly to the hollow at the
base of my throat.
"Are you still worried now?" he murmured against my skin.
"Yes." I struggled to concentrate. "About hitting trees and getting sick."
His nose drew a line up the skin of my throat to the point of my chin. His cold breath tickled my skin.
"And now?" His lips whispered against my jaw.
"Trees," I gasped. "Motion sickness."
He lifted his face to kiss my eyelids. "Bella, you don't really think I would hit a tree, do you?"
"No, but I might." There was no confidence in my voice. He smelled an easy victory.
He kissed slowly down my cheek, stopping just at the corner of my mouth.
"Would I let a tree hurt you?" His lips barely brushed against my trembling lower lip.
"No," I breathed. I knew there was a second part to my brilliant defense, but I couldn't quite call it back.
"You see," he said, his lips moving against mine. "There's nothing to be afraid of, is there?"
"No," I sighed, giving up.
Then he took my face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding lips moving
against mine.
There really was no excuse for my behavior. Obviously I knew better by now. And yet I couldn't seem
to stop from reacting exactly as I had the first time. Instead of keeping safely motionless, my arms
reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and I was suddenly welded to his stone figure. I sighed, and
my lips parted.
He staggered back, breaking my grip effortlessly.
"Damn it, Bella!" he broke off, gasping. "You'll be the death of me, I swear you will."
I leaned over, bracing my hands against my knees for support.
"You're indestructible," I mumbled, trying to catch my breath.
"I might have believed that before I met you. Now let's get out of here before I do something really
stupid," he growled.
He threw me across his back as he had before, and I could see the extra effort it took for him to be as
gentle as he was. I locked my legs around his waist and secured my arms in a choke hold around his
neck.
"Don't forget to close your eyes," he warned severely.
I quickly tucked my face into his shoulder blade, under my own arm, and squeezed my eyes shut.
And I could hardly tell we were moving. I could feel him gliding along beneath me, but he could have
been strolling down the sidewalk, the movement was so smooth. I was tempted to peek, just to see if he

was really flying through the forest like before, but I resisted. It wasn't worth that awful dizziness. I
contented myself with listening to his breath come and go evenly.
I wasn't quite sure we had stopped until he reached back and touched my hair.
"It's over, Bella."
I dared to open my eyes, and, sure enough, we were at a standstill. I stiffly unlocked my stranglehold on
his body and slipped to the ground, landing on my backside.
"Oh!" I huffed as I hit the wet ground.
He stared at me incredulously, evidently not sure whether he was still too mad to find me funny. But my
bewildered expression pushed him over the edge, and he broke into a roar of laughter.
I picked myself up, ignoring him as I brushed the mud and bracken off the back of my jacket. That only
made him laugh harder. Annoyed, I began to stride off into the forest.
I felt his arm around my waist.
"Where are you going, Bella?"
"To watch a baseball game. You don't seem to be interested in playing anymore, but I'm sure the others
will have fun without you."
"You're going the wrong way."
I turned around without looking at him, and stalked off in the opposite direction. He caught me again.
"Don't be mad, I couldn't help myself. You should have seen your face." He chuckled before he could
stop himself.
"Oh, you're the only one who's allowed to get mad?" I asked, raising my eyebrows.
"I wasn't mad at you."
"'Bella, you'll be the death of me'?" I quoted sourly.
"That was simply a statement of fact."
I tried to turn away from him again, but he held me fast.
"You were mad," I insisted.
"Yes."
"But you just said —"
"That I wasn't mad at you. Can't you see that, Bella?" He was suddenly intense, all trace of teasing gone.
"Don't you understand?"
"See what?" I demanded, confused by his sudden mood swing as much as his words.
"I'm never angry with you — how could I be? Brave, trusting… warm as you are."
"Then why?" I whispered, remembering the black moods that pulled him away from me, that I'd always

interpreted as well-justified frustration — frustration at my weakness, my slowness, my unruly human
reactions…
He put his hands carefully on both sides of my face. "I infuriate myself," he said gently. "The way I can't
seem to keep from putting you in danger. My very existence puts you at risk. Sometimes I truly hate
myself. I should be stronger, I should be able to —"
I placed my hand over his mouth. "Don't."
He took my hand, moving it from his lips, but holding it to his face.
"I love you," he said. "It's a poor excuse for what I'm doing, but it's still true."
It was the first time he'd said he loved me — in so many words. He might not realize it, but I certainly
did.
"Now, please try to behave yourself," he continued, and he bent to softly brush his lips against mine.
I held properly still. Then I sighed.
"You promised Chief Swan that you would have me home early, remember? We'd better get going."
"Yes, ma'am."
He smiled wistfully and released all of me but one hand. He led me a few feet through the tall, wet ferns
and draping moss, around a massive hemlock tree, and we were there, on the edge of an enormous open
field in the lap of the Olympic peaks. It was twice the size of any baseball stadium.
I could see the others all there; Esme, Emmett, and Rosalie, sitting on a bare outcropping of rock, were
the closest to us, maybe a hundred yards away. Much farther out I could see Jasper and Alice, at least a
quarter of a mile apart, appearing to throw something back and forth, but I never saw any ball. It looked
like Carlisle was marking bases, but could they really be that far apart?
When we came into view, the three on the rocks rose.
Esme started toward us. Emmett followed after a long look at Rosalie's back; Rosalie had risen gracefully
and strode off toward the field without a glance in our direction. My stomach quivered uneasily in
response.
"Was that you we heard, Edward?" Esme asked as she approached.
"It sounded like a bear choking," Emmett clarified.
I smiled hesitantly at Esme. "That was him."
"Bella was being unintentionally funny," Edward explained, quickly settling the score.
Alice had left her position and was running, or dancing, toward us. She hurtled to a fluid stop at our feet.
"It's time," she announced.
As soon as she spoke, a deep rumble of thunder shook the forest beyond us, and then crashed westward
toward town.
"Eerie, isn't it?" Emmett said with easy familiarity, winking at me.

were simply curious."
All this was said in a flurry of words that lasted only a few seconds. I had listened carefully and caught
most of it, though I couldn't hear what Esme now asked Edward with a silent vibration of her lips. I only
saw the slight shake of his head and the look of relief on her face.
"You catch, Esme," he said. "I'll call it now." And he planted himself in front of me.
The others returned to the field, warily sweeping the dark forest with their sharp eyes. Alice and Esme
seemed to orient themselves around where I stood.
"Take your hair down," Edward said in a low, even voice.
I obediently slid the rubber band out of my hair and shook it out around me.
I stated the obvious. "The others are coming now."
"Yes, stay very still, keep quiet, and don't move from my side, please." He hid the stress in his voice well,
but I could hear it. He pulled my long hair forward, around my face.
"That won't help," Alice said softly. "I could smell her across the field."
"I know." A hint of frustration colored his tone.
Carlisle stood at the plate, and the others joined the game halfheartedly.
"What did Esme ask you?" I whispered.
He hesitated for a second before he answered. "Whether they were thirsty," he muttered unwillingly.
The seconds ticked by; the game progressed with apathy now. No one dared to hit harder than a bunt,
and Emmett, Rosalie, and Jasper hovered in the infield. Now and again, despite the fear that numbed my
brain, I was aware of Rosalie's eyes on me. They were expressionless, but something about the way she
held her mouth made me think she was angry.
Edward paid no attention to the game at all, eyes and mind ranging the forest.
"I'm sorry, Bella," he muttered fiercely. "It was stupid, irresponsible, to expose you like this. I'm so
sorry."
I heard his breath stop, and his eyes zeroed in on right field. He took a half step, angling himself between
me and what was coming.
Carlisle, Emmett, and the others turned in the same direction, hearing sounds of passage much too faint
for my ears.

They closed ranks before they continued cautiously toward Edward's family, exhibiting the natural
respect of a troop of predators as it encounters a larger, unfamiliar group of its own kind.
As they approached, I could see how different they were from the Cullens. Their walk was catlike, a gait
that seemed constantly on the edge of shifting into a crouch. They dressed in the ordinary gear of
backpackers: jeans and casual button-down shirts in heavy, weatherproof fabrics. The clothes were
frayed, though, with wear, and they were barefoot. Both men had cropped hair, but the woman's brilliant
orange hair was filled with leaves and debris from the woods.
Their sharp eyes carefully took in the more polished, urbane stance of Carlisle, who, flanked by Emmett
and Jasper, stepped guardedly forward to meet them. Without any seeming communication between
them, they each straightened into a more casual, erect bearing.
The man in front was easily the most beautiful, his skin olive-toned beneath the typical pallor, his hair a
glossy black. He was of a medium build, hard-muscled, of course, but nothing next to Emmett's brawn.
He smiled an easy smile, exposing a flash of gleaming white teeth.
The woman was wilder, her eyes shifting restlessly between the men facing her, and the loose grouping
around me, her chaotic hair quivering in the slight breeze. Her posture was distinctly feline. The second
male hovered unobtrusively behind them, slighter than the leader, his light brown hair and regular features
both nondescript. His eyes, though completely still, somehow seemed the most vigilant.
Their eyes were different, too. Not the gold or black I had come to expect, but a deep burgundy color
that was disturbing and sinister.
The dark-haired man, still smiling, stepped toward Carlisle.
"We thought we heard a game," he said in a relaxed voice with the slightest of French accents. "I'm
Laurent, these are Victoria and James." He gestured to the vampires beside him.
"I'm Carlisle. This is my family, Emmett and Jasper, Rosalie, Esme and Alice, Edward and Bella." He
pointed us out in groups, deliberately not calling attention to individuals. I felt a shock when he said my
name.
"Do you have room for a few more players?" Laurent asked sociably.
Carlisle matched Laurent's friendly tone. "Actually, we were just finishing up. But we'd certainly be
interested another time. Are you planning to stay in the area for long?"
"We're headed north, in fact, but we were curious to see who was in the neighborhood. We haven't run
into any company in a long time."
"No, this region is usually empty except for us and the occasional visitor, like yourselves."
The tense atmosphere had slowly subsided into a casual conversation; I guessed that Jasper was using his
peculiar gift to control the situation.
"What's your hunting range?" Laurent casually inquired.
Carlisle ignored the assumption behind the inquiry. "The Olympic Range here, up and down the Coast
Ranges on occasion. We keep a permanent residence nearby. There's another permanent settlement like
ours up near Denali."
Laurent rocked back on his heels slightly.

"Permanent? How do you manage that?" There was honest curiosity in his voice.
"Why don't you come back to our home with us and we can talk comfortably?" Carlisle invited. "It's a
rather long story."
James and Victoria exchanged a surprised look at the mention of the word "home," but Laurent
controlled his expression better.
"That sounds very interesting, and welcome." His smile was genial. "We've been on the hunt all the way
down from Ontario, and we haven't had the chance to clean up in a while." His eyes moved
appreciatively over Carlisle's refined appearance.
"Please don't take offense, but we'd appreciate it if you'd refrain from hunting in this immediate area. We
have to stay inconspicuous, you understand," Carlisle explained.
"Of course." Laurent nodded. "We certainly won't encroach on your territory. We just ate outside of
Seattle, anyway," he laughed. A shiver ran up my spine.
"We'll show you the way if you'd like to run with us — Emmett and Alice, you can go with Edward and
Bella to get the Jeep," he casually added.
Three things seemed to happen simultaneously while Carlisle was speaking. My hair ruffled with the light
breeze, Edward stiffened, and the second male, James, suddenly whipped his head around, scrutinizing
me, his nostrils flaring.
A swift rigidity fell on all of them as James lurched one step forward into a crouch. Edward bared his
teeth, crouching in defense, a feral snarl ripping from his throat.
It was nothing like the playful sounds I'd heard from him this morning; it was the single most menacing
thing I had ever heard, and chills ran from the crown of my head to the back of my heels.
"What's this?" Laurent exclaimed in open surprise. Neither James nor Edward relaxed their aggressive
poses. James feinted slightly to the side, and Edward shifted in response.
"She's with us." Carlisle's firm rebuff was directed toward James. Laurent seemed to catch my scent less
powerfully than James, but awareness now dawned on his face.
"You brought a snack?" he asked, his expression incredulous as he took an involuntary step forward.
Edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his lip curling high above his glistening, bared teeth.
Laurent stepped back again.
"I said she's with us," Carlisle corrected in a hard voice.
"But she's human," Laurent protested. The words were not at all aggressive, merely astounded.
"Yes." Emmett was very much in evidence at Carlisle's side, his eyes on James. James slowly
straightened out of his crouch, but his eyes never left me, his nostrils still wide. Edward stayed tensed like
a lion in front of me.
When Laurent spoke, his tone was soothing — trying to defuse the sudden hostility. "It appears we have
a lot to learn about each other."
"Indeed." Carlisle's voice was still cool.

"But we'd like to accept your invitation." His eyes flicked toward me and back to Carlisle. "And, of
course, we will not harm the human girl. We won't hunt in your range, as I said."
James glanced in disbelief and aggravation at Laurent and exchanged another brief look with Victoria,
whose eyes still flickered edgily from face to face.
Carlisle measured Laurent's open expression for a moment before he spoke. "We'll show you the way.
Jasper, Rosalie, Esme?" he called. They gathered together, blocking me from view as they converged.
Alice was instantly at my side, and Emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on James as he backed
toward us.
"Let's go, Bella." Edward's voice was low and bleak.
This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow
and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were close behind us, hiding me. I stumbled
alongside Edward, still stunned with fear. I couldn't hear if the main group had left yet. Edward's
impatience was almost tangible as we moved at human speed to the forest edge.
Once we were into the trees, Edward slung me over his back without breaking stride. I gripped as tightly
as possible as he took off, the others close on his heels. I kept my head down, but my eyes, wide with
fright, wouldn't close. They plunged through the now-black forest like wraiths. The sense of exhilaration
that usually seemed to possess Edward as he ran was completely absent, replaced by a fury that
consumed him and drove him still faster. Even with me on his back, the others trailed behind.
We reached the Jeep in an impossibly short time, and Edward barely slowed as he flung me in the
backseat.
"Strap her in," he ordered Emmett, who slid in beside me.
Alice was already in the front seat, and Edward was starting the engine. It roared to life and we swerved
backward, spinning around to face the winding road.
Edward was growling something too fast for me to understand, but it sounded a lot like a string of
profanities.
The jolting trip was much worse this time, and the darkness only made it more frightening. Emmett and
Alice both glared out the side windows.
We hit the main road, and though our speed increased, I could see much better where we were going.
And we were headed south, away from Forks.
"Where are we going?" I asked.
No one answered. No one even looked at me.
"Dammit, Edward! Where are you taking me?"
"We have to get you away from here — far away — now." He didn't look back, his eyes on the road.
The speedometer read a hundred and five miles an hour.
"Turn around! You have to take me home!" I shouted. I struggled with the stupid harness, tearing at the
straps.
"Emmett," Edward said grimly.

And Emmett secured my hands in his steely grasp.
"No! Edward! No, you can't do this."
"I have to, Bella, now please be quiet."
"I won't! You have to take me back — Charlie will call the FBI! They'll be all over your family —
Carlisle and Esme! They'll have to leave, to hide forever!"
"Calm down, Bella." His voice was cold. "We've been there before."
"Not over me, you don't! You're not ruining everything over me!" I struggled violently, with total futility.
Alice spoke for the first time. "Edward, pull over."
He flashed her a hard look, and then sped up.
"Edward, let's just talk this through."
"You don't understand," he roared in frustration. I'd never heard his voice so loud; it was deafening in the
confines of the Jeep. The speedometer neared one hundred and fifteen. "He's a tracker, Alice, did you
see that? He's a tracker!"
I felt Emmett stiffen next to me, and I wondered at his reaction to the word. It meant something more to
the three of them than it did to me; I wanted to understand, but there was no opening for me to ask.
"Pull over, Edward." Alice's tone was reasonable, but there was a ring of authority in it I'd never heard
before.
The speedometer inched passed one-twenty.
"Do it, Edward."
"Listen to me, Alice. I saw his mind. Tracking is his passion, his obsession — and he wants her, Alice —
her, specifically. He begins the hunt tonight."
"He doesn't know where —"
He interrupted her. "How long do you think it will take him to cross her scent in town? His plan was
already set before the words were out of Laurent's mouth."
I gasped, knowing where my scent would lead. "Charlie! You can't leave him there! You can't leave
him!" I thrashed against the harness.
"She's right," Alice said.
The car slowed slightly.
"Let's just look at our options for a minute," Alice coaxed.
The car slowed again, more noticeably, and then suddenly we screeched to a stop on the shoulder of the
highway. I flew against the harness, and then slammed back into the seat.
"There are no options," Edward hissed.
"I'm not leaving Charlie!" I yelled.

Edward pressed his fingers to his temples and squeezed his eyes shut.
"Please," I said in a much smaller voice.
He didn't look up. When he spoke, his voice sounded worn.
"You're leaving tonight, whether the tracker sees or not. You tell Charlie that you can't stand another
minute in Forks. Tell him whatever story works. Pack the first things your hands touch, and then get in
your truck. I don't care what he says to you. You have fifteen minutes. Do you hear me? Fifteen minutes
from the time you cross the doorstep."
The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer
started to race up the dial.
"Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands.
"Oh, sorry." He let me loose.
A few minutes passed in silence, other than the roar of the engine. Then Edward spoke again.
"This is how it's going to happen. When we get to the house, if the tracker is not there, I will walk her to
the door. Then she has fifteen minutes." He glared at me in the rearview mirror. "Emmett, you take the
outside of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as she is. After she's out, you two can
take the Jeep home and tell Carlisle."
"No way," Emmett broke in. "I'm with you."
"Think it through, Emmett. I don't know how long I'll be gone."
"Until we know how far this is going to go, I'm with you."
Edward sighed. "If the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving."
"We're going to make it there before him," Alice said confidently.
Edward seemed to accept that. Whatever his problem with Alice was, he didn't doubt her now.
"What are we going to do with the Jeep?" she asked.
His voice had a hard edge. "You're driving it home."
"No, I'm not," she said calmly.
The unintelligible stream of profanities started again.
"We can't all fit in my truck," I whispered.
Edward didn't appear to hear me.
"I think you should let me go alone," I said even more quietly.
He heard that.
"Bella, please just do this my way, just this once," he said between clenched teeth.
"Listen, Charlie's not an imbecile," I protested. "If you're not in town tomorrow, he's going to get

"Edward, we'll be with her," Alice reminded him.
"What are you going to do in Phoenix?" he asked her scathingly.
"Stay indoors."
"I kind of like it." Emmett was thinking about cornering James, no doubt.
"Shut up, Emmett."
"Look, if we try to take him down while she's still around, there's a much better chance that someone
will get hurt — she'll get hurt, or you will, trying to protect her. Now, if we get him alone…" He trailed
off with a slow smile. I was right.
The Jeep was crawling slowly along now as we drove into town. Despite my brave talk, I could feel the
hairs on my arms standing up. I thought about Charlie, alone in the house, and tried to be courageous.
"Bella." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything
happen to yourself— anything at all — I'm holding you personally responsible. Do you understand that?"
"Yes," I gulped.
He turned to Alice.
"Can Jasper handle this?"
"Give him some credit, Edward. He's been doing very, very well, all things considered."
"Can you handle this?" he asked.
And graceful little Alice pulled back her lips in a horrific grimace and let loose with a guttural snarl that
had me cowering against the seat in terror.
Edward smiled at her. "But keep your opinions to yourself," he muttered suddenly.

Charlie was waiting up for me. All the house lights were on. My mind was blank as I tried to think of a
way to make him let me go. This wasn't going to be pleasant.
Edward pulled up slowly, staying well back from my truck. All three of them were acutely alert, ramrod
straight in their seats, listening to every sound of the wood, looking through every shadow, catching every
scent, searching for something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to
listen.
"He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me get out of the harness.
"Don't worry, Bella," he said in a low but cheerful voice, "we'll take care of things here quickly."
I felt moisture filling up my eyes as I looked at Emmett. I barely knew him, and yet, somehow, not
knowing when I would see him again after tonight was anguishing. I knew this was just a faint taste of the
goodbyes I would have to survive in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill.

"Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was a command. They slithered soundlessly into the darkness, instantly
disappearing. Edward opened my door and took my hand, then drew me into the protecting enclosure of
his arm. He walked me swiftly toward the house, eyes always roving through the night.
"Fifteen minutes," he warned under his breath.
"I can do this." I sniffled. My tears had given me an inspiration.
I stopped on the porch and took hold of his face in my hands. I looked fiercely into his eyes.
"I love you," I said in a low, intense voice. "I will always love you, no matter what happens now."
"Nothing is going to happen to you, Bella," he said just as fiercely.
"Just follow the plan, okay? Keep Charlie safe for me. He's not going to like me very much after this, and
I want to have the chance to apologize later."
"Get inside, Bella. We have to hurry." His voice was urgent.
"One more thing," I whispered passionately. "Don't listen to another word I say tonight!" He was leaning
in, and so all I had to do was stretch up on my toes to kiss his surprised, frozen lips with as much force
as I was capable of. Then I turned and kicked the door open.
"Go away, Edward!" I yelled at him, running inside and slamming the door shut in his still-shocked face.
"Bella?" Charlie had been hovering in the living room, and he was already on his feet.
"Leave me alone!" I screamed at him through my tears, which were flowing relentlessly now. I ran up the
stairs to my room, throwing the door shut and locking it. I ran to my bed, flinging myself on the floor to
retrieve my duffel bag. I reached swiftly between the mattress and box spring to grab the knotted old
sock that contained my secret cash hoard.
Charlie was pounding on my door.
"Bella, are you okay? What's going on?" His voice was frightened.
"I'm going borne," I shouted, my voice breaking in the perfect spot.
"Did he hurt you?" His tone edged toward anger.
"No!" I shrieked a few octaves higher. I turned to my dresser, and Edward was already there, silently
yanking out armfuls of random clothes, which he proceeded to throw to me.
"Did he break up with you?" Charlie was perplexed.
"No!" I yelled, slightly more breathless as I shoved everything into the bag. Edward threw another
drawer's contents at me. The bag was pretty much full now.
"What happened, Bella?" Charlie shouted through the door, pounding again.
"I broke up with him!" I shouted back, jerking on the zipper of my bag. Edward's capable hands pushed
mine away and zipped it smoothly. He put the strap carefully over my arm.
"I'll be in the truck — go!" he whispered, and pushed me toward the door. He vanished out the window.
I unlocked the door and pushed past Charlie roughly, struggling with my heavy bag as I ran down the

His long hands unexpectedly gripped my waist, and his foot pushed mine off the gas pedal. He pulled me
across his lap, wrenching my hands free of the wheel, and suddenly he was in the driver's seat. The truck
didn't swerve an inch.
"You wouldn't be able to find the house," he explained.
Lights flared suddenly behind us. I stared out the back window, eyes wide with horror.
"It's just Alice," he reassured me. He took my hand again.
My mind was filled with the image of Charlie in the doorway. "The tracker?"
"He heard the end of your performance," Edward said grimly.
"Charlie?" I asked in dread.
"The tracker followed us. He's running behind us now."
My body went cold.
"Can we outrun him?"
"No." But he sped up as he spoke. The truck's engine whined in protest.
My plan suddenly didn't feel so brilliant anymore.
I was staring back at Alice's headlights when the truck shuddered and a dark shadow sprung up outside
the window.
My bloodcurdling scream lasted a fraction of a second before Edward's hand clamped down on my
mouth.
"It's Emmett!"
He released my mouth, and wound his arm around my waist.
"It's okay, Bella," he promised. "You're going to be safe."
We raced through the quiet town toward the north highway.
"I didn't realize you were still so bored with small-town life," he said conversationally, and I knew he was
trying to distract me. "It seemed like you were adjusting fairly well — especially recently. Maybe I was
just flattering myself that I was making life more interesting for you."
"I wasn't being nice," I confessed, ignoring his attempt at diversion, looking down at my knees. "That was
the same thing my mom said when she left him. You could say I was hitting below the belt."
"Don't worry. He'll forgive you." He smiled a little, though it didn't touch his eyes.
I stared at him desperately, and he saw the naked panic in my eyes.
"Bella, it's going to be all right."
"But it won't be all right when I'm not with you," I whispered.
"We'll be together again in a few days," he said, tightening his arm around me. "Don't forget that this was

your idea."
"It was the best idea — of course it was mine."
His answering smile was bleak and disappeared immediately.
"Why did this happen?" I asked, my voice catching. "Why me?"
He stared blackly at the road ahead. "It's my fault — I was a fool to expose you like that." The rage in
his voice was directed internally.
"That's not what I meant," I insisted. "I was there, big deal. It didn't bother the other two. Why did this
James decide to kill met There're people all over the place, why me?"
He hesitated, thinking before he answered.
"I got a good look at his mind tonight," he began in a low voice. "I'm not sure if there's anything I could
have done to avoid this, once he saw you. It is partially your fault." His voice was wry. "If you didn't
smell so appallingly luscious, he might not have bothered. But when I defended you… well, that made it a
lot worse. He's not used to being thwarted, no matter how insignificant the object. He thinks of himself as
a hunter and nothing else. His existence is consumed with tracking, and a challenge is all he asks of life.
Suddenly we've presented him with a beautiful challenge — a large clan of strong fighters all bent on
protecting the one vulnerable element. You wouldn't believe how euphoric he is now. It's his favorite
game, and we've just made it his most exciting game ever." His tone was full of disgust.
He paused a moment.
"But if I had stood by, he would have killed you right then," he said with hopeless frustration.
"I thought… I didn't smell the same to the others… as I do to you," I said hesitantly.
"You don't. But that doesn't mean that you aren't still a temptation to every one of them. If you had
appealed to the tracker — or any of them — the same way you appeal to me, it would have meant a
fight right there."
I shuddered.
"I don't think I have any choice but to kill him now," he muttered. "Carlisle won't like it."
I could hear the tires cross the bridge, though I couldn't see the river in the dark. I knew we were getting
close. I had to ask him now.
"How can you kill a vampire?"
He glanced at me with unreadable eyes and his voice was suddenly harsh. "The only way to be sure is to
tear him to shreds, and then burn the pieces."
"And the other two will fight with him?"
"The woman will. I'm not sure about Laurent. They don't have a very strong bond — he's only with them
for convenience. He was embarrassed by James in the meadow…"
"But James and the woman — they'll try to kill you?" I asked, my voice raw.
"Bella, don't you dare waste time worrying about me. Your only concern is keeping yourself safe and —

"Go in peace," was Carlisle's formal answer.
Laurent took another long look around himself, and then he hurried out the door.
The silence lasted less than a second.
"How close?" Carlisle looked to Edward.
Esme was already moving; her hand touched an inconspicuous keypad on the wall, and with a groan,
huge metal shutters began sealing up the glass wall. I gaped.
"About three miles out past the river; he's circling around to meet up with the female."
"What's the plan?"
"We'll lead him off, and then Jasper and Alice will run her south."
"And then?"
Edward's tone was deadly. "As soon as Bella is clear, we hunt him."
"I guess there's no other choice," Carlisle agreed, his face grim.
Edward turned to Rosalie.
"Get her upstairs and trade clothes," Edward commanded. She stared back at him with livid disbelief.
"Why should I?" she hissed. "What is she to me? Except a menace — a danger you've chosen to inflict
on all of us."
I flinched back from the venom in her voice.
"Rose…" Emmett murmured, putting one hand on her shoulder. She shook it off.
But I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction.
He surprised me. He looked away from Rosalie as if she hadn't spoken, as if she didn't exist.
"Esme?" he asked calmly.
"Of course," Esme murmured.
Esme was at my side in half a heartbeat, swinging me up easily into her arms, and dashing up the stairs
before I could gasp in shock.
"What are we doing?" I asked breathlessly as she set me down in a dark room somewhere off the
second-story hall.
"Trying to confuse the smell. It won't work for long, but it might help get you out." I could hear her
clothes falling to the floor.
"I don't think I'll fit…" I hesitated, but her hands were abruptly pulling my shirt over my head. I quickly
stripped my jeans off myself. She handed me something, it felt like a shirt. I struggled to get my arms
through the right holes. As soon as I was done she handed me her slacks. I yanked them on, but I
couldn't get my feet out; they were too long. She deftly rolled the hems a few times so I could stand.
Somehow she was already in my clothes. She pulled me back to the stairs, where Alice stood, a small

leather bag in one hand. They each grabbed one of my elbows and half-carried me as they flew down the
stairs.
It appeared that everything had been settled downstairs in our absence. Edward and Emmett were ready
to leave, Emmett carrying a heavy-looking backpack over his shoulder. Carlisle was handing something
small to Esme. He turned and handed Alice the same thing — it was a tiny silver cell phone.
"Esme and Rosalie will be taking your truck, Bella," he told me as he passed. I nodded, glancing warily at
Rosalie. She was glowering at Carlisle with a resentful expression.
"Alice, Jasper — take the Mercedes. You'll need the dark tint in the south."
They nodded as well.
"We're taking the Jeep."
I was surprised to see that Carlisle intended to go with Edward. I realized suddenly, with a stab of fear,
that they made up the hunting party.
"Alice," Carlisle asked, "will they take the bait?"
Everyone watched Alice as she closed her eyes and became incredibly still.
Finally her eyes opened. "He'll track you. The woman will follow the truck. We should be able to leave
after that." Her voice was certain.
"Let's go." Carlisle began to walk toward the kitchen.
But Edward was at my side at once. He caught me up in his iron grip, crushing me to him. He seemed
unaware of his watching family as he pulled my face to his, lifting my feet off the floor. For the shortest
second, his lips were icy and hard against mine. Then it was over. He set me down, still holding my face,
his glorious eyes burning into mine.
His eyes went blank, curiously dead, as he turned away.
And they were gone.
We stood there, the others looking away from me as the tears streaked noiselessly down my face.
The silent moment dragged on, and then Esme's phone vibrated in her hand. It flashed to her ear.
"Now," she said. Rosalie stalked out the front door without another glance in my direction, but Esme
touched my cheek as she passed.
"Be safe." Her whisper lingered behind them as they slipped out the door. I heard my truck start
thunderously, and then fade away.
Jasper and Alice waited. Alice's phone seemed to be at her ear before it buzzed.
"Edward says the woman is on Esme's trail. I'll get the car." She vanished into the shadows the way
Edward had gone.
Jasper and I looked at each other. He stood across the length of the entryway from me… being careful.
"You're wrong, you know," he said quietly.

The shadows of the palm trees slanted across the freeway — defined, sharper than I remembered, paler
than they should be. Nothing could hide in these shadows. The bright, open freeway seemed benign
enough. But I felt no relief, no sense of homecoming.
"Which way to the airport, Bella?" Jasper had asked, and I flinched, though his voice was quite soft and
un-alarming. It was the first sound, besides the purr of the car, to break the long night's silence.
"Stay on the I-ten," I'd answered automatically. "We'll pass right by it."
My brain had worked slowly through the fog of sleep deprivation.
"Are we flying somewhere?" I'd asked Alice.
"No, but it's better to be close, just in case."
I remembered beginning the loop around Sky Harbor International… but not ending it. I suppose that
must have been when I'd fallen asleep.
Though, now that I'd chased the memories down, I did have a vague impression of leaving the car — the
sun was just falling behind the horizon — my arm draped over Alice's shoulder and her arm firm around
my waist, dragging me along as I stumbled through the warm, dry shadows.
I had no memory of this room.
I looked at the digital clock on the nightstand. The red numbers claimed it was three o'clock, but they
gave no indication if it was night or day. No edge of light escaped the thick curtains, but the room was
bright with the light from the lamps.
I rose stiffly and staggered to the window, pulling back the drapes.
It was dark outside. Three in the morning, then. My room looked out on a deserted section of the
freeway and the new long-term parking garage for the airport. It was slightly comforting to be able to
pinpoint time and place.
I looked down at myself. I was still wearing Esme's clothes, and they didn't fit very well at all. I looked
around the room, glad when I discovered my duffel bag on top of the low dresser.
I was on my way to find new clothes when a light tap on the door made me jump.
"Can I come in?" Alice asked.
I took a deep breath. "Sure."
She walked in, and looked me over cautiously. "You look like you could sleep longer," she said.
I just shook my head.
She drifted silently to the curtains and closed them securely before turning back to me.
"We'll need to stay inside," she told me.
"Okay." My voice was hoarse; it cracked.
"Thirsty?" she asked.
I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?"

"Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front room. Edward
reminded me that you have to eat a lot more frequently than we do."
I was instantly more alert. "He called?"
"No," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left."
She took my hand carefully and led me through the door into the living room of the hotel suite. I could
hear a low buzz of voices coming from the TV. Jasper sat motionlessly at the desk in the corner, his eyes
watching the news with no glimmer of interest.
I sat on the floor next to the coffee table, where a tray of food waited, and began picking at it without
noticing what I was eating.
Alice perched on the arm of the sofa and stared blankly at the TV like Jasper.
I ate slowly, watching her, turning now and then to glance quickly at Jasper. It began to dawn on me that
they were too still. They never looked away from the screen, though commercials were playing now. I
pushed the tray away, my stomach abruptly uneasy. Alice looked down at me.
"What's wrong, Alice?" I asked.
"Nothing's wrong." Her eyes were wide, honest… and I didn't trust them.
"What do we do now?"
"We wait for Carlisle to call."
"And should he have called by now?" I could see that I was near the mark. Alice's eyes flitted from mine
to the phone on top of her leather bag and back.
"What does that mean?" My voice quavered, and I fought to control it. "That he hasn't called yet?"
"It just means that they don't have anything to tell us."
But her voice was too even, and the air was harder to breathe.
Jasper was suddenly beside Alice, closer to me than usual.
"Bella," he said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "You have nothing to worry about. You are completely
safe here."
"I know that."
"Then why are you frightened?" he asked, confused. He might feel the tenor of my emotions, but he
couldn't read the reasons behind them.
"You heard what Laurent said." My voice was just a whisper, but I was sure they could hear me. "He
said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to
any of them, Carlisle, Emmett… Edward…" I gulped. "If that wild female hurts Esme…" My voice had
grown higher, a note of hysteria beginning to rise in it. "How could I live with myself when it's my fault?
None of you should be risking yourselves for me —"
"Bella, Bella, stop," he interrupted me, his words pouring out so quickly they were hard to understand.
"You're worrying about all the wrong things, Bella. Trust me on this — none of us are in jeopardy. You

"Bella, how many times do we have to tell you that there's no danger to us?"
"Would you tell me the truth, though?"
"Yes. I will always tell you the truth." Her voice was earnest.
I deliberated for a moment, and decided she meant it.
"Tell me then… how do you become a vampire?"
My question caught her off guard. She was quiet. I rolled over to look at her, and her expression seemed
ambivalent.
"Edward doesn't want me to tell you that," she said firmly, but I sensed she didn't agree.
"That's not fair. I think I have a right to know."
"I know."
I looked at her, waiting.
She sighed. "He'll be extremely angry."
"It's none of his business. This is between you and me. Alice, as a friend, I'm begging you." And we were
friends now, somehow — as she must have known we would be all along.
She looked at me with her splendid, wise eyes… choosing.
"I'll tell you the mechanics of it," she said finally, "but I don't remember it myself, and I've never done it or
seen it done, so keep in mind that I can only tell you the theory."
I waited.
"As predators, we have a glut of weapons in our physical arsenal — much, much more than really
necessary. The strength, the speed, the acute senses, not to mention those of us like Edward, Jasper, and
I, who have extra senses as well. And then, like a carnivorous flower, we are physically attractive to our
prey."
I was very still, remembering how pointedly Edward had demonstrated the same concept for me in the
meadow.
She smiled a wide, ominous smile. "We have another fairly superfluous weapon. We're also venomous,"
she said, her teeth glistening. "The venom doesn't kill — it's merely incapacitating. It works slowly,
spreading through the bloodstream, so that, once bitten, our prey is in too much physical pain to escape
us. Mostly superfluous, as I said. If we're that close, the prey doesn't escape. Of course, there are
always exceptions. Carlisle, for example."
"So… if the venom is left to spread…" I murmured.
"It takes a few days for the transformation to be complete, depending on how much venom is in the
bloodstream, how close the venom enters to the heart. As long as the heart keeps beating, the poison
spreads, healing, changing the body as it moves through it. Eventually the heart stops, and the conversion
is finished. But all that time, every minute of it, a victim would be wishing for death."
I shivered.

"There's nothing else?"
She shook her head. They looked at each other, motionless.
"What does it mean?" I asked.
Neither of them answered for a moment, then Jasper looked at me.
"It means the tracker's plans have changed. He's made a decision that will lead him to the mirror room,
and the dark room."
"But we don't know where those rooms are?"
"No."
"But we do know that he won't be in the mountains north of Washington, being hunted. He'll elude them."
Alice's voice was bleak.
"Should we call?" I asked. They traded a serious look, undecided.
And the phone rang.
Alice was across the room before I could lift my head to look at it.
She pushed a button and held the phone to her ear, but she didn't speak first.
"Carlisle," she breathed. She didn't seem surprised or relieved, the way I felt.
"Yes," she said, glancing at me. She listened for a long moment.
"I just saw him." She described again the vision she'd seen. "Whatever made him get on that plane… it
was leading him to those rooms." She paused. "Yes," Alice said into the phone, and then she spoke to
me. "Bella?"
She held the phone out toward me. I ran to it.
"Hello?" I breathed.
"Bella," Edward said.
"Oh, Edward! I was so worried."
"Bella," he sighed in frustration, "I told you not to worry about anything but yourself." It was so
unbelievably good to hear his voice. I felt the hovering cloud of despair lighten and drift back as he
spoke.
"Where are you?"
"We're outside of Vancouver. Bella, I'm sorry — we lost him. He seems suspicious of us — he's careful
to stay just far enough away that I can't hear what he's thinking. But he's gone now — it looks like he got
on a plane. We think he's heading back to Forks to start over." I could hear Alice filling in Jasper behind
me, her quick words blurring together into a humming noise.
"I know. Alice saw that he got away."
"You don't have to worry, though. He won't find anything to lead him to you. You just have to stay there

and wait till we find him again."
"I'll be fine. Is Esme with Charlie?"
"Yes — the female has been in town. She went to the house, but while Charlie was at work. She hasn't
gone near him, so don't be afraid. He's safe with Esme and Rosalie watching."
"What is she doing?"
"Probably trying to pick up the trail. She's been all through the town during the night. Rosalie traced her
through the airport, all the roads around town, the school… she's digging, Bella, but there's nothing to
find."
"And you're sure Charlie's safe?"
"Yes, Esme won't let him out of her sight. And we'll be there soon. If the tracker gets anywhere near
Forks, we'll have him."
"I miss you," I whispered.
"I know, Bella. Believe me, I know. It's like you've taken half my self away with you."
"Come and get it, then," I challenged.
"Soon, as soon as I possibly can. I will make you safe first." His voice was hard.
"I love you," I reminded him.
"Could you believe that, despite everything I've put you through, I love you, too?"
"Yes, I can, actually."
"I'll come for you soon."
"I'll be waiting."
As soon as the phone went dead, the cloud of depression began to creep over me again.
I turned to give the phone back to Alice and found her and Jasper bent over the table, where Alice was
sketching on a piece of hotel stationery. I leaned on the back of the couch, looking over her shoulder.
She drew a room: long, rectangular, with a thinner, square section at the back. The wooden planks that
made up the floor stretched lengthwise across the room. Down the walls were lines denoting the breaks
in the mirrors. And then, wrapping around the walls, waist high, a long band. The band Alice said was
gold.
"It's a ballet studio," I said, suddenly recognizing the familiar shapes.
They looked at me, surprised.
"Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was an undercurrent of something I
couldn't identify. Alice bent her head to her work, her hand flying across the page now, the shape of an
emergency exit taking shape against the back wall, the stereo and TV on a low table by the front right
corner.
"It looks like a place I used to go for dance lessons — when I was eight or nine. It was shaped just the

Two pairs of eternal eyes stared at me.
"That's my mother's house."
Alice was already off the couch, phone in hand, dialing. I stared at the precise rendering of my mother's
family room. Uncharacteristically, Jasper slid closer to me. He lightly touched his hand to my shoulder,
and the physical contact seemed to make his calming influence stronger. The panic stayed dull,
unfocused.
Alice's lips were trembling with the speed of her words, the low buzzing impossible to decipher. I
couldn't concentrate.
"Bella," Alice said. I looked at her numbly.
"Bella, Edward is coming to get you. He and Emmett and Carlisle are going to take you somewhere, to
hide you for a while."
"Edward is coming?" The words were like a life vest, holding my head above the flood.
"Yes, he's catching the first flight out of Seattle. We'll meet him at the airport, and you'll leave with him."
"But, my mother… he came here for my mother, Alice!" Despite Jasper, the hysteria bubbled up in my
voice.
"Jasper and I will stay till she's safe."
"I can't win, Alice. You can't guard everyone I know forever. Don't you see what he's doing? He's not
tracking me at all. He'll find someone, he'll hurt someone I love… Alice, I can't —"
"We'll catch him, Bella," she assured me.
"And what if you get hurt, Alice? Do you think that's okay with me? Do you think it's only my human
family he can hurt me with?"
Alice looked meaningfully at Jasper. A deep, heavy fog of lethargy washed over me, and my eyes closed
without my permission. My mind struggled against the fog, realizing what was happening. I forced my
eyes open and stood up, stepping away from Jasper's hand.
"I don't want to go back to sleep," I snapped.
I walked to my room and shut the door, slammed it really, so I could be free to go to pieces privately.
This time Alice didn't follow me. For three and a half hours I stared at the wall, curled in a ball, rocking.
My mind went around in circles, trying to come up with some way out of this nightmare. There was no
escape, no reprieve. I could see only one possible end looming darkly in my future. The only question
was how many other people would be hurt before I reached it.
The only solace, the only hope I had left, was knowing that I would see Edward soon. Maybe, if I could
just see his face again, I would also be able to see the solution that eluded me now.
When the phone rang, I returned to the front room, a little ashamed of my behavior. I hoped I hadn't
offended either of them, that they would know how grateful I was for the sacrifices they were making on
my account.
Alice was talking as rapidly as ever, but what caught my attention was that, for the first time, Jasper was
not in the room. I looked at the clock — it was five-thirty in the morning.

"They're just boarding their plane," Alice told me. "They'll land at nine-forty-five." Just a few more hours
to keep breathing till he was here.
"Where's Jasper?"
"He went to check out."
"You aren't staying here?"
"No, we're relocating closer to your mother's house."
My stomach twisted uneasily at her words.
But the phone rang again, distracting me. She looked surprised, but I was already walking forward,
reaching hopefully for the phone.
"Hello?" Alice asked. "No, she's right here." She held the phone out to me. Your mother, she mouthed.
"Hello?"
"Bella? Bella?" It was my mother's voice, in a familiar tone I had heard a thousand times in my childhood,
anytime I'd gotten too close to the edge of the sidewalk or strayed out of her sight in a crowded place. It
was the sound of panic.
I sighed. I'd been expecting this, though I'd tried to make my message as unalarming as possible without
lessening the urgency of it.
"Calm down, Mom," I said in my most soothing voice, walking slowly away from Alice. I wasn't sure if I
could lie as convincingly with her eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a minute and I'll
explain everything, I promise."
I paused, surprised that she hadn't interrupted me yet.
"Mom?"
"Be very careful not to say anything until I tell you to." The voice I heard now was as unfamiliar as it was
unexpected. It was a man's tenor voice, a very pleasant, generic voice — the kind of voice that you
heard in the background of luxury car commercials. He spoke very quickly.
"Now, I don't need to hurt your mother, so please do exactly as I say, and she'll be fine." He paused for
a minute while I listened in mute horror. "That's very good," he congratulated. "Now repeat after me, and
do try to sound natural. Please say, "No, Mom, stay where you are.'"
"No, Mom, stay where you are." My voice was barely more than a whisper.
"I can see this is going to be difficult." The voice was amused, still light and friendly. "Why don't you walk
into another room now so your face doesn't ruin everything? There's no reason for your mother to suffer.
As you're walking, please say, "Mom, please listen to me." Say it now."
"Mom, please listen to me," my voice pleaded. I walked very slowly to the bedroom, feeling Alice's
worried stare on my back. I shut the door behind me, trying to think clearly through the terror that
gripped my brain.
"There now, are you alone? Just answer yes or no."

"Yes."
"But they can still hear you, I'm sure."
"Yes."
"All right, then," the agreeable voice continued, "say, "Mom, trust me.'"
"Mom, trust me."
"This worked out rather better than I expected. I was prepared to wait, but your mother arrived ahead of
schedule. It's easier this way, isn't it? Less suspense, less anxiety for you."
I waited.
"Now I want you to listen very carefully. I'm going to need you to get away from your friends; do you
think you can do that? Answer yes or no."
"No."
"I'm sorry to hear that. I was hoping you would be a little more creative than that. Do you think you could
get away from them if your mother's life depended on it? Answer yes or no."
Somehow, there had to be a way. I remembered that we were going to the airport. Sky Harbor
International Airport: crowded, confusingly laid out…
"Yes."
"That's better. I'm sure it won't be easy, but if I get the slightest hint that you have any company, well, that
would be very bad for your mother," the friendly voice promised. "You must know enough about us by
now to realize how quickly I would know if you tried to bring anyone along with you. And how little time
I would need to deal with your mother if that was the case. Do you understand? Answer yes or no."
"Yes." My voice broke.
"Very good, Bella. Now this is what you have to do. I want you to go to your mother's house. Next to
the phone there will be a number. Call it, and I'll tell you where to go from there." I already knew where I
would go, and where this would end. But I would follow his instructions exactly. "Can you do that?
Answer yes or no."
"Yes."
"Before noon, please, Bella. I haven't got all day," he said politely.
"Where's Phil?" I asked tersely.
"Ah, be careful now, Bella. Wait until I ask you to speak, please."
I waited.
"It's important, now, that you don't make your friends suspicious when you go back to them. Tell them
that your mother called, and that you talked her out of coming home for the time being. Now repeat after
me, "Thank you, Mom." Say it now."
"Thank you, Mom." The tears were coming. I tried to fight them back.

"Say, "I love you, Mom, I'll see you soon." Say it now."
"I love you, Mom." My voice was thick. "I'll see you soon," I promised.
"Goodbye, Bella. I look forward to seeing you again." He hung up.
I held the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't unbend my fingers to drop it.
I knew I had to think, but my head was filled with the sound of my mother's panic. Seconds ticked by
while I fought for control.
Slowly, slowly, my thoughts started to break past that brick wall of pain. To plan. For I had no choices
now but one: to go to the mirrored room and die. I had no guarantees, nothing to give to keep my mother
alive. I could only hope that James would be satisfied with winning the game, that beating Edward would
be enough. Despair gripped me; there was no way to bargain, nothing I could offer or withhold that could
influence him. But I still had no choice. I had to try.
I pushed the terror back as well as I could. My decision was made. It did no good to waste time
agonizing over the outcome. I had to think clearly, because Alice and Jasper were waiting for me, and
evading them was absolutely essential, and absolutely impossible.
I was suddenly grateful that Jasper was gone. If he had been here to feel my anguish in the last five
minutes, how could I have kept them from being suspicious? I choked back the dread, the anxiety, tried
to stifle it. I couldn't afford it now. I didn't know when he would return.
I concentrated on my escape. I had to hope that my familiarity with the airport would turn the odds in my
favor. Somehow, I had to keep Alice away…
I knew Alice was in the other room waiting for me, curious. But I had to deal with one more thing in
private, before Jasper was back.
I had to accept that I wouldn't see Edward again, not even one last glimpse of his face to carry with me
to the mirror room. I was going to hurt him, and I couldn't say goodbye. I let the waves of torture wash
over me, have their way for a time. Then I pushed them back, too, and went to face Alice.
The only expression I could manage was a dull, dead look. I saw her alarm and I didn't wait for her to
ask. I had just one script and I'd never manage improvisation now.
"My mom was worried, she wanted to come home. But it's okay, I convinced her to stay away." My
voice was lifeless.
"We'll make sure she's fine, Bella, don't worry."
I turned away; I couldn't let her see my face.
My eye fell on a blank page of the hotel stationery on the desk. I went to it slowly, a plan forming. There
was an envelope there, too. That was good.
"Alice," I asked slowly, without turning, keeping my voice level. "If I write a letter for my mother, would
you give it to her? Leave it at the house, I mean."
"Sure, Bella." Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to keep my
emotions under better control.
I went into the bedroom again, and knelt next to the little bedside table to write.

I love you. I am so sorry. He has my mom, and I have to try. I know it may not work. I am so very,
very sorry.
Don't be angry with Alice and Jasper. If I get away from them it will be a miracle. Tell them thank
you for me. Alice especially, please.
And please, please, don't come after him. That's what he wants. I think. I can't bear it if anyone
has to be hurt because of me, especially you. Please, this is the only thing I can ask you now. For
me.
I love you. Forgive me.
Bella

It had taken much less time than I'd thought — all the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart. The
minutes were ticking by more slowly than usual. Jasper still hadn't come back when I returned to Alice. I
was afraid to be in the same room with her, afraid that she would guess… and afraid to hide from her for
the same reason.
I would have thought I was far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts tortured and unstable, but
I was surprised when I saw Alice bent over the desk, gripping the edge with two hands.
"Alice?"
She didn't react when I called her name, but her head was slowly rocking side to side, and I saw her
face. Her eyes were blank, dazed… My thoughts flew to my mother. Was I already too late?
I hurried to her side, reaching out automatically to touch her hand.
"Alice!" Jasper's voice whipped, and then he was right behind her, his hands curling over hers, loosening
them from their grip on the table. Across the room, the door swung shut with a low click.
"What is it?" he demanded.
She turned her face away from me, into his chest. "Bella," she said.
"I'm right here," I replied.
Her head twisted around, her eyes locking on mine, their expression still strangely blank. I realized at

the sooner to see his face. How quickly, how gracefully he would move through the crowds of people
separating us. And then I would run to close those last few feet between us — reckless as always — and
I would be in his marble arms, finally safe.
I wondered where we would have gone. North somewhere, so he could be outside in the day. Or maybe
somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun together again. I imagined him by the shore, his skin
sparkling like the sea. It wouldn't matter how long we had to hide. To be trapped in a hotel room with
him would be a kind of heaven. So many questions I still had for him. I could talk to him forever, never
sleeping, never leaving his side.
I could see his face so clearly now… almost hear his voice. And, despite all the horror and hopelessness,
I was fleetingly happy. So involved was I in my escapist daydreams, I lost all track of the seconds racing
by.
"Hey, what was the number?"
The cabbie's question punctured my fantasy, letting all the colors run out of my lovely delusions. Fear,
bleak and hard, was waiting to fill the empty space they left behind.
"Fifty-eight twenty-one." My voice sounded strangled. The cabbie looked at me, nervous that I was
having an episode or something.
"Here we are, then." He was anxious to get me out of his car, probably hoping I wouldn't ask for my
change.
"Thank you," I whispered. There was no need to be afraid, I reminded myself. The house was empty. I
had to hurry; my mom was waiting for me, frightened, depending on me.
I ran to the door, reaching up automatically to grab the key under the eave. I unlocked the door. It was
dark inside, empty, normal. I ran to the phone, turning on the kitchen light on my way. There, on the
whiteboard, was a ten-digit number written in a small, neat hand. My fingers stumbled over the keypad,
making mistakes. I had to hang up and start again. I concentrated only on the buttons this time, carefully
pressing each one in turn. I was successful. I held the phone to my ear with a shaking hand. It rang only
once.
"Hello, Bella," that easy voice answered. "That was very quick. I'm impressed."
"Is my mom all right?"
"She's perfectly fine. Don't worry, Bella, I have no quarrel with her. Unless you didn't come alone, of
course." Light, amused.
"I'm alone." I'd never been more alone in my entire life.
"Very good. Now, do you know the ballet studio just around the corner from your home?"
"Yes. I know how to get there."
"Well, then, I'll see you very soon."
I hung up.
I ran from the room, through the door, out into the baking heat.
There was no time to look back at my house, and I didn't want to see it as it was now — empty, a

symbol of fear instead of sanctuary. The last person to walk through those familiar rooms was my enemy.
From the corner of my eye, I could almost see my mother standing in the shade of the big eucalyptus tree
where I'd played as a child. Or kneeling by the little plot of dirt around the mailbox, the cemetery of all
the flowers she'd tried to grow. The memories were better than any reality I would see today. But I raced
away from them, toward the corner, leaving everything behind me.
I felt so slow, like I was running through wet sand — I couldn't seem to get enough purchase from the
concrete. I tripped several times, once falling, catching myself with my hands, scraping them on the
sidewalk, and then lurching up to plunge forward again. But at last I made it to the corner. Just another
street now; I ran, sweat pouring down my face, gasping. The sun was hot on my skin, too bright as it
bounced off the white concrete and blinded me. I felt dangerously exposed. More fiercely than I would
have dreamed I was capable of, I wished for the green, protective forests of Forks… of home.
When I rounded the last corner, onto Cactus, I could see the studio, looking just as I remembered it. The
parking lot in front was empty, the vertical blinds in all the windows drawn. I couldn't run anymore — I
couldn't breathe; exertion and fear had gotten the best of me. I thought of my mother to keep my feet
moving, one in front of the other.
As I got closer, I could see the sign inside the door. It was handwritten on hot pink paper; it said the
dance studio was closed for spring break. I touched the handle, tugged on it cautiously. It was unlocked.
I fought to catch my breath, and opened the door.
The lobby was dark and empty, cool, the air conditioner thrumming. The plastic molded chairs were
stacked along the walls, and the carpet smelled like shampoo. The west dance floor was dark, I could
see through the open viewing window. The east dance floor, the bigger room, was lit. But the blinds were
closed on the window.
Terror seized me so strongly that I was literally trapped by it. I couldn't make my feet move forward.
And then my mother's voice called.
"Bella? Bella?" That same tone of hysterical panic. I sprinted to the door, to the sound of her voice.
"Bella, you scared me! Don't you ever do that to me again!" Her voice continued as I ran into the long,
high-ceilinged room.
I stared around me, trying to find where her voice was coming from. I heard her laugh, and I whirled to
the sound.
There she was, on the TV screen, tousling my hair in relief. It was Thanksgiving, and I was twelve. We'd
gone to see my grandmother in California, the last year before she died. We went to the beach one day,
and I'd leaned too far over the edge of the pier. She'd seen my feet flailing, trying to reclaim my balance.
"Bella? Bella?" she'd called to me in fear.
And then the TV screen was blue.
I turned slowly. He was standing very still by the back exit, so still I hadn't noticed him at first. In his hand
was a remote control. We stared at each other for a long moment, and then he smiled.
He walked toward me, quite close, and then passed me to put the remote down next to the VCR. I
turned carefully to watch him.
"Sorry about that, Bella, but isn't it better that your mother didn't really have to be involved in all this?"

As I drifted, I dreamed.
Where I floated, under the dark water, I heard the happiest sound my mind could conjure up — as
beautiful, as uplifting, as it was ghastly. It was another snarl; a deeper, wilder roar that rang with fury.
I was brought back, almost to the surface, by a sharp pain slashing my upraised hand, but I couldn't find
my way back far enough to open my eyes.
And then I knew I was dead.
Because, through the heavy water, I heard the sound of an angel calling my name, calling me to the only
heaven I wanted.
"Oh no, Bella, no!" the angel's voice cried in horror.
Behind that longed-for sound was another noise — an awful tumult that my mind shied away from. A
vicious bass growling, a shocking snapping sound, and a high keening, suddenly breaking off…
I tried to concentrate on the angel's voice instead.
"Bella, please! Bella, listen to me, please, please, Bella, please!" he begged.
Yes, I wanted to say. Anything. But I couldn't find my lips.
"Carlisle!" the angel called, agony in his perfect voice. "Bella, Bella, no, oh please, no, no!" And the angel
was sobbing tearless, broken sobs.
The angel shouldn't weep, it was wrong. I tried to find him, to tell him everything was fine, but the water
was so deep, it was pressing on me, and I couldn't breathe.
There was a point of pressure against my head. It hurt. Then, as that pain broke through the darkness to
me, other pains came, stronger pains. I cried out, gasping, breaking through the dark pool.
"Bella!" the angel cried.
"She's lost some blood, but the head wound isn't deep," a calm voice informed me. "Watch out for her
leg, it's broken."
A howl of rage strangled on the angel's lips.
I felt a sharp stab in my side. This couldn't be heaven, could it? There was too much pain for that.
"Some ribs, too, I think," the methodical voice continued.
But the sharp pains were fading. There was a new pain, a scalding pain in my hand that was
overshadowing everything else.

Someone was burning me.
"Edward." I tried to tell him, but my voice was so heavy and slow. I couldn't understand myself.
"Bella, you're going to be fine. Can you hear me, Bella? I love you."
"Edward," I tried again. My voice was a little clearer.
"Yes, I'm here."
"It hurts," I whimpered.
"I know, Bella, I know" — and then, away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?"
"My bag, please… Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised.
"Alice?" I groaned.
"She's here, she knew where to find you."
"My hand hurts," I tried to tell him.
"I know, Bella. Carlisle will give you something, it will stop."
"My hand is burning!" I screamed, finally breaking through the last of the darkness, my eyes fluttering
open. I couldn't see his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the
fire and put it out?
His voice was frightened. "Bella?"
"The fire! Someone stop the fire!" I screamed as it burned me.
"Carlisle! Her hand!"
"He bit her." Carlisle's voice was no longer calm, it was appalled.
I heard Edward catch his breath in horror.
"Edward, you have to do it." It was Alice's voice, close by my head. Cool fingers brushed at the wetness
in my eyes.
"No!" he bellowed.
"Alice," I moaned.
"There may be a chance," Carlisle said.
"What?" Edward begged.
"See if you can suck the venom back out. The wound is fairly clean." As Carlisle spoke, I could feel
more pressure on my head, something poking and pulling at my scalp. The pain of it was lost in the pain
of the fire.
"Will that work?" Alice's voice was strained.
"I don't know," Carlisle said. "But we have to hurry."

"Carlisle, I…" Edward hesitated. "I don't know if I can do that." There was agony in his beautiful voice
again.
"It's your decision, Edward, either way. I can't help you. I have to get this bleeding stopped here if you're
going to be taking blood from her hand."
I writhed in the grip of the fiery torture, the movement making the pain in my leg flare sickeningly.
"Edward!" I screamed. I realized my eyes were closed again. I opened them, desperate to find his face.
And I found him. Finally, I could see his perfect face, staring at me, twisted into a mask of indecision and
pain.
"Alice, get me something to brace her leg!" Carlisle was bent over me, working on my head. "Edward,
you must do it now, or it will be too late."
Edward's face was drawn. I watched his eyes as the doubt was suddenly replaced with a blazing
determination. His jaw tightened. I felt his cool, strong fingers on my burning hand, locking it in place.
Then his head bent over it, and his cold lips pressed against my skin.
At first the pain was worse. I screamed and thrashed against the cool hands that held me back. I heard
Alice's voice, trying to calm me. Something heavy held my leg to the floor, and Carlisle had my head
locked in the vise of his stone arms.
Then, slowly, my writhing calmed as my hand grew more and more numb. The fire was dulling, focusing
into an ever-smaller point.
I felt my consciousness slipping as the pain subsided. I was afraid to fall into the black waters again,
afraid I would lose him in the darkness.
"Edward," I tried to say, but I couldn't hear my voice. They could hear me.
"He's right here, Bella."
"Stay, Edward, stay with me…"
"I will." His voice was strained, but somehow triumphant.
I sighed contentedly. The fire was gone, the other pains dulled by a sleepiness seeping through my body.
"Is it all out?" Carlisle asked from somewhere far away.
"Her blood tastes clean," Edward said quietly. "I can taste the morphine."
"Bella?" Carlisle called to me.
I tried to answer. "Mmmmm?"
"Is the fire gone?"
"Yes," I sighed. "Thank you, Edward."
"I love you," he answered.
"I know," I breathed, so tired.
I heard my favorite sound in the world: Edward's quiet laugh, weak with relief.

"Bella?" Carlisle asked again.
I frowned; I wanted to sleep. "What?"
"Where is your mother?"
"In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was
pitifully frail.
But that reminded me.
"Alice." I tried to open my eyes. "Alice, the video — he knew you, Alice, he knew where you came
from." I meant to speak urgently, but my voice was feeble. "I smell gasoline," I added, surprised through
the haze in my brain.
"It's time to move her," Carlisle said.
"No, I want to sleep," I complained.
"You can sleep, sweetheart, I'll carry you," Edward soothed me.
And I was in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone.
"Sleep now, Bella" were the last words I heard.

Some very unpleasant memories were beginning to come back to me. I shuddered, and then winced.
He was instantly anxious. "Bella, what's wrong?"
"What happened to James?"
"After I pulled him off you, Emmett and Jasper took care of him." There was a fierce note of regret in his
voice.
This confused me. "I didn't see Emmett and Jasper there."
"They had to leave the room… there was a lot of blood."
"But you stayed."
"Yes, I stayed."
"And Alice, and Carlisle…" I said in wonder.
"They love you, too, you know."
A flash of painful images from the last time I'd seen Alice reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the
tape?" I asked anxiously.
"Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred.
"She was always in the dark, that's why she didn't remember."
"I know. She understands now." His voice was even, but his face was black with fury.
I tried to reach his face with my free hand, but something stopped me. I glanced down to see the IV
pulling at my hand.
"Ugh." I winced.
"What is it?" he asked anxiously — distracted, but not enough. The bleakness did not entirely leave his
eyes.
"Needles," I explained, looking away from the one in my hand. I concentrated on a warped ceiling tile
and tried to breathe deeply despite the ache in my ribs.
"Afraid of a needle," he muttered to himself under his breath, shaking his head. "Oh, a sadistic vampire,
intent on torturing her to death, sure, no problem, she runs off to meet him. An IV, on the other hand…"
I rolled my eyes. I was pleased to discover that this reaction, at least, was pain-free. I decided to change
the subject.
"Why are you here?" I asked.
He stared at me, first confusion and then hurt touching his eyes. His brows pulled together as he frowned.
"Do you want me to leave?"
"No!" I protested, horrified by the thought. "No, I meant, why does my mother think you're here? I need
to have my story straight before she gets back."
"Oh," he said, and his forehead smoothed back into marble. "I came to Phoenix to talk some sense into

She took in Edward's still form on the recliner, and tiptoed to my bedside.
"He never leaves, does he?" she mumbled to herself.
"Mom, I'm so glad to see you!"
She bent down to hug me gently, and I felt warm tears falling on my cheeks.
"Bella, I was so upset!"
"I'm sorry, Mom. But everything's fine now, it's okay," I comforted her.
"I'm just glad to finally see your eyes open." She sat on the edge of my bed.
I suddenly realized I didn't have any idea when it was. "How long have they been closed?"
"It's Friday, hon, you've been out for a while."
"Friday?" I was shocked. I tried to remember what day it had been when… but I didn't want to think
about that.
"They had to keep you sedated for a while, honey — you've got a lot of injuries."
"I know." I could feel them.
"You're lucky Dr. Cullen was there. He's such a nice man… very young, though. And he looks more like
a model than a doctor…"
"You met Carlisle?"
"And Edward's sister Alice. She's a lovely girl."
"She is," I agreed wholeheartedly.
She glanced over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes closed in the chair. "You didn't tell me you
had such good friends in Forks."
I cringed, and then moaned.
"What hurts?" she demanded anxiously, turning back to me. Edward's eyes flashed to my face.
"It's fine," I assured them. "I just have to remember not to move." He lapsed back into his phony slumber.
I took advantage of my mother's momentary distraction to keep the subject from returning to my
less-than-candid behavior. "Where's Phil?" I asked quickly.
"Florida — oh, Bella! You'll never guess! Just when we were about to leave, the best news!"
"Phil got signed?" I guessed.
"Yes! How did you guess! The Suns, can you believe it?"
"That's great, Mom," I said as enthusiastically as I could manage, though I had little idea what that meant.
"And you'll like Jacksonville so much," she gushed while I stared at her vacantly. "I was a little bit worried
when Phil started talking about Akron, what with the snow and everything, because you know how I hate

the cold, but now Jacksonville! It's always sunny, and the humidity really isn't that bad. We found the
cutest house, yellow, with white trim, and a porch just like in an old movie, and this huge oak tree, and
it's just a few minutes from the ocean, and you'll have your own bathroom —"
"Wait, Mom!" I interrupted. Edward still had his eyes closed, but he looked too tense to pass as asleep.
"What are you talking about? I'm not going to Florida. I live in Forks."
"But you don't have to anymore, silly," she laughed. "Phil will be able to be around so much more now…
we've talked about it a lot, and what I'm going to do is trade off on the away games, half the time with
you, half the time with him."
"Mom." I hesitated, wondering how best to be diplomatic about this. "I want to live in Forks. I'm already
settled in at school, and I have a couple of girlfriends" — she glanced toward Edward again when I
reminded her of friends, so I tried another direction — "and Charlie needs me. He's just all alone up
there, and he can't cook at all."
"You want to stay in Forks?" she asked, bewildered. The idea was inconceivable to her. And then her
eyes flickered back toward Edward. "Why?"
"I told you — school, Charlie — ouch!" I'd shrugged. Not a good idea.
Her hands fluttered helplessly over me, trying to find a safe place to pat. She made do with my forehead;
it was unbandaged.
"Bella, honey, you hate Forks," she reminded me.
"It's not so bad."
She frowned and looked back and forth between Edward and me, this time very deliberately.
"Is it this boy?" she whispered.
I opened my mouth to lie, but her eyes were scrutinizing my face, and I knew she would see through that.
"He's part of it," I admitted. No need to confess how big a part. "So, have you had a chance to talk with
Edward?" I asked.
"Yes." She hesitated, looking at his perfectly still form. "And I want to talk to you about that."
Uh-oh. "What about?" I asked.
"I think that boy is in love with you," she accused, keeping her voice low.
"I think so, too," I confided.
"And how do you feel about him?" She only poorly concealed the raging curiosity in her voice.
I sighed, looking away. As much as I loved my mom, this was not a conversation I wanted to have with
her. "I'm pretty crazy about him." There — that sounded like something a teenager with her first
boyfriend might say.
"Well, he seems very nice, and, my goodness, he's incredibly good-looking, but you're so young,
Bella…" Her voice was unsure; as far as I could remember, this was the first time since I was eight that
she'd come close to trying to sound like a parental authority. I recognized the reasonable-but-firm tone of
voice from talks I'd had with her about men.

"I know that, Mom. Don't worry about it. It's just a crush," I soothed her.
"That's right," she agreed, easily pleased.
Then she sighed and glanced guiltily over her shoulder at the big, round clock on the wall.
"Do you need to go?"
She bit her lip. "Phil's supposed to call in a little while… I didn't know you were going to wake up…"
"No problem, Mom." I tried to tone down the relief so she wouldn't get her feelings hurt. "I won't be
alone."
"I'll be back soon. I've been sleeping here, you know," she announced, proud of herself.
"Oh, Mom, you don't have to do that! You can sleep at home — I'll never notice." The swirl of
painkillers in my brain was making it hard to concentrate even now, though, apparently, I'd been sleeping
for days.
"I was too nervous," she admitted sheepishly. "There's been some crime in the neighborhood, and I don't
like being there alone."
"Crime?" I asked in alarm.
"Someone broke into that dance studio around the corner from the house and burned it to the ground —
there's nothing left at all! And they left a stolen car right out front. Do you remember when you used to
dance there, honey?"
"I remember." I shivered, and winced.
"I can stay, baby, if you need me."
"No, Mom, I'll be fine. Edward will be with me."
She looked like that might be why she wanted to stay. "I'll be back tonight." It sounded as much like a
warning as it sounded like a promise, and she glanced at Edward again as she said it.
"I love you, Mom."
"I love you, too, Bella. Try to be more careful when you walk, honey, I don't want to lose you."
Edward's eyes stayed closed, but a wide grin flashed across his face.
A nurse came bustling in then to check all my tubes and wires. My mother kissed my forehead, patted
my gauze-wrapped hand, and left.
The nurse was checking the paper readout on my heart monitor.
"Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there."
"I'm fine," I assured her.
"I'll tell your RN that you're awake. She'll be in to see you in a minute."
As soon as she closed the door, Edward was at my side.

"You stole a car?" I raised my eyebrows.
He smiled, unrepentant. "It was a good car, very fast."
"How was your nap?" I asked.
"Interesting." His eyes narrowed.
"What?"
He looked down while he answered. "I'm surprised. I thought Florida… and your mother… well, I
thought that's what you would want."
I stared at him uncomprehendingly. "But you'd be stuck inside all day in Florida. You'd only be able to
come out at night, just like a real vampire."
He almost smiled, but not quite. And then his face was grave. "I would stay in Forks, Bella. Or
somewhere like it," he explained. "Someplace where I couldn't hurt you anymore."
It didn't sink in at first. I continued to stare at him blankly as the words one by one clicked into place in
my head like a ghastly puzzle. I was barely conscious of the sound of my heart accelerating, though, as
my breathing became hyperventilation, I was aware of the sharp aching in my protesting ribs.
He didn't say anything; he watched my face warily as the pain that had nothing to do with broken bones,
pain that was infinitely worse, threatened to crush me.
And then another nurse walked purposefully into the room. Edward sat still as stone as she took in my
expression with a practiced eye before turning to the monitors.
"Time for more pain meds, sweetheart?" she asked kindly, tapping the IV feed.
"No, no," I mumbled, trying to keep the agony out of my voice. "I don't need anything." I couldn't afford
to close my eyes now.
"No need to be brave, honey. It's better if you don't get too stressed out; you need to rest." She waited,
but I just shook my head.
"Okay," she sighed. "Hit the call button when you're ready."
She gave Edward a stern look, and threw one more anxious glance at the machinery, before leaving.
His cool hands were on my face; I stared at him with wild eyes.
"Shhh, Bella, calm down."
"Don't leave me," I begged in a broken voice.
"I won't," he promised. "Now relax before I call the nurse back to sedate you."
But my heart couldn't slow.
"Bella." He stroked my face anxiously. "I'm not going anywhere. I'll be right here as long as you need
me."
"Do you swear you won't leave me?" I whispered. I tried to control the gasping, at least. My ribs were
throbbing.

He put his hands on either side of my face and brought his face close to mine. His eyes were wide and
serious. "I swear."
The smell of his breath was soothing. It seemed to ease the ache of my breathing. He continued to hold
my gaze while my body slowly relaxed and the beeping returned to a normal pace. His eyes were dark,
closer to black than gold today.
"Better?" he asked.
"Yes," I said cautiously.
He shook his head and muttered something unintelligible. I thought I picked out the word "overreaction."
"Why did you say that?" I whispered, trying to keep my voice from shaking. "Are you tired of having to
save me all the time? Do you want me to go away?"
"No, I don't want to be without you, Bella, of course not. Be rational. And I have no problem with saving
you, either — if it weren't for the fact that I was the one putting you in danger… that I'm the reason that
you're here."
"Yes, you are the reason." I frowned. "The reason I'm here — alive."
"Barely." His voice was just a whisper. "Covered in gauze and plaster and hardly able to move."
"I wasn't referring to my most recent near-death experience," I said, growing irritated. "I was thinking of
the others — you can take your pick. If it weren't for you, I would be rotting away in the Forks
cemetery."
He winced at my words, but the haunted look didn't leave his eyes.
"That's not the worst part, though," he continued to whisper. He acted as if I hadn't spoken. "Not seeing
you there on the floor… crumpled and broken." His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too late. Not
even hearing you scream in pain — all those unbearable memories that I'll carry with me for the rest of
eternity. No, the very worst was feeling… knowing that I couldn't stop. Believing that I was going to kill
you myself."
"But you didn't."
"I could have. So easily."
I knew I needed to stay calm… but he was trying to talk himself into leaving me, and the panic fluttered
in my lungs, trying to get out.
"Promise me," I whispered.
"What?"
"You know what." I was starting to get angry now. He was so stubbornly determined to dwell on the
negative.
He heard the change in my tone. His eyes tightened. "I don't seem to be strong enough to stay away from
you, so I suppose that you'll get your way… whether it kills you or not," he added roughly.
"Good." He hadn't promised, though — a fact that I had not missed. The panic was only barely
contained; I had no strength left to control the anger. "You told me how you stopped… now I want to

know why," I demanded.
"Why?" he repeated warily.
"Why you did it. Why didn't you just let the venom spread? By now I would be just like you."
Edward's eyes seemed to turn flat black, and I remembered that this was something he'd never intended
me to know. Alice must have been preoccupied by the things she'd learned about herself… or she'd been
very careful with her thoughts around him — clearly, he'd had no idea that she'd filled me in on the
mechanics of vampire conversions. He was surprised, and infuriated. His nostrils flared, his mouth looked
as if it was chiseled from stone.
He wasn't going to answer, that much was clear.
"I'll be the first to admit that I have no experience with relationships," I said. "But it just seems logical… a
man and woman have to be somewhat equal… as in, one of them can't always be swooping in and
saving the other one. They have to save each other equally."
He folded his arms on the side of my bed and rested his chin on his arms. His expression was smooth,
the anger reined in. Evidently he'd decided he wasn't angry with me. I hoped I'd get a chance to warn
Alice before he caught up with her.
"You have saved me," he said quietly.
"I can't always be Lois Lane," I insisted. "I want to be Superman, too."
"You don't know what you're asking." His voice was soft; he stared intently at the edge of the pillowcase.
"I think I do."
"Bella, you don't know. I've had almost ninety years to think about this, and I'm still not sure."
"Do you wish that Carlisle hadn't saved you?"
"No, I don't wish that." He paused before continuing. "But my life was over. I wasn't giving anything up."
"You are my life. You're the only thing it would hurt me to lose." I was getting better at this. It was easy
to admit how much I needed him.
He was very calm, though. Decided.
"I can't do it, Bella. I won't do that to you."
"Why not?" My throat rasped and the words weren't as loud as I'd meant them to be. "Don't tell me it's
too hard! After today, or I guess it was a few days ago… anyway, after that, it should be nothing."
He glared at me.
"And the pain?" he asked.
I blanched. I couldn't help it. But I tried to keep my expression from showing how clearly I remembered
the feeling… the fire in my veins.
"That's my problem," I said. "I can handle it."
"It's possible to take bravery to the point where it becomes insanity."

"It's not an issue. Three days. Big deal."
Edward grimaced again as my words reminded him that I was more informed than he had ever intended
me to be. I watched him repress the anger, watched as his eyes grew speculative.
"Charlie?" he asked curtly. "Renée?"
Minutes passed in silence as I struggled to answer his question. I opened my mouth, but no sound came
out. I closed it again. He waited, and his expression became triumphant because he knew I had no true
answer.
"Look, that's not an issue either," I finally muttered; my voice was as unconvincing as it always was when
I lied. "Renée has always made the choices that work for her — she'd want me to do the same. And
Charlie's resilient, he's used to being on his own. I can't take care of them forever. I have my own life to
live."
"Exactly," he snapped. "And I won't end it for you."
"If you're waiting for me to be on my deathbed, I've got news for you! I was just there!"
"You're going to recover," he reminded me.
I took a deep breath to calm myself, ignoring the spasm of pain it triggered. I stared at him, and he stared
back. There was no compromise in his face.
"No," I said slowly. "I'm not."
His forehead creased. "Of course you are. You may have a scar or two…"
"You're wrong," I insisted. "I'm going to die."
"Really, Bella." He was anxious now. "You'll be out of here in a few days. Two week at most."
I glared at him. "I may not die now… but I'm going to die sometime. Every minute of the day, I get
closer. And I'm going to get old."
He frowned as what I was saying sunk in, pressing his long fingers to his temples and closing his eyes.
"That's how it's supposed to happen. How it should happen. How it would have happened if I didn't exist
— and I shouldn't exist."
I snorted. He opened his eyes in surprise. "That's stupid. That's like going to someone who's just won the
lottery, taking their money, and saying, "Look, let's just go back to how things should be. It's better that
way." And I'm not buying it."
"I'm hardly a lottery prize," he growled.
"That's right. You're much better."
He rolled his eyes and set his lips. "Bella, we're not having this discussion anymore. I refuse to damn you
to an eternity of night and that's the end of it."
"If you think that's the end, then you don't know me very well," I warned him. "You're not the only
vampire I know."
His eyes went black again. "Alice wouldn't dare."

And for a moment he looked so frightening that I couldn't help but believe it — I couldn't imagine
someone brave enough to cross him.
"Alice already saw it, didn't she?" I guessed. "That's why the things she says upset you. She knows I'm
going to be like you… someday."
"She's wrong. She also saw you dead, but that didn't happen, either."
"You'll never catch me betting against Alice."
We stared at each other for a very long time. It was quiet except for the whirring of the machines, the
beeping, the dripping, the ticking of the big clock on the wall. Finally, his expression softened.
"So where does that leave us?" I wondered.
He chuckled humorlessly. "I believe it's called an impasse."
I sighed. "Ouch," I muttered.
"How are you feeling?" he asked, eyeing the button for the nurse.
"I'm fine," I lied.
"I don't believe you," he said gently.
"I'm not going back to sleep."
"You need rest. All this arguing isn't good for you."
"So give in," I hinted.
"Nice try." He reached for the button.
"No!"
He ignored me.
"Yes?" the speaker on the wall squawked.
"I think we're ready for more pain medication," he said calmly, ignoring my furious expression.
"I'll send in the nurse." The voice sounded very bored.
"I won't take it," I promised.
He looked toward the sack of fluids hanging beside my bed. "I don't think they're going to ask you to
swallow anything."
My heart rate started to climb. He read the fear in my eyes, and sighed in frustration.
"Bella, you're in pain. You need to relax so you can heal. Why are you being so difficult? They're not
going to put any more needles in you now."
"I'm not afraid of the needles," I mumbled. "I'm afraid to close my eyes."
Then he smiled his crooked smile, and took my face between his hands. "I told you I'm not going

anywhere. Don't be afraid. As long as it makes you happy, I'll be here."
I smiled back, ignoring the ache in my cheeks. "You're talking about forever, you know."
"Oh, you'll get over it — it's just a crush."
I shook my head in disbelief— it made me dizzy. "I was shocked when Renée swallowed that one. I
know you know better."
"That's the beautiful thing about being human," he told me. "Things change."
My eyes narrowed. "Don't hold your breath."
He was laughing when the nurse came in, brandishing a syringe.
"Excuse me," she said brusquely to Edward.
He got up and crossed to the end of the small room, leaning against the wall. He folded his arms and
waited. I kept my eyes on him, still apprehensive. He met my gaze calmly.
"Here you go, honey." The nurse smiled as she injected the medicine into my tube. "You'll feel better
now."
"Thanks," I mumbled, unenthusiastic. It didn't take long. I could feel the drowsiness trickling through my
bloodstream almost immediately.
"That ought to do it," she muttered as my eyelids drooped.
She must have left the room, because something cold and smooth touched my face.
"Stay." The word was slurred.
"I will," he promised. His voice was beautiful, like a lullaby. "Like I said, as long as it makes you happy…
as long as it's what's best for you."
I tried to shake my head, but it was too heavy. "'S not the same thing," I mumbled.
He laughed. "Don't worry about that now, Bella. You can argue with me when you wake up."
I think I smiled. '"Kay."
I could feel his lips at my ear.
"I love you," he whispered.
"Me, too."
"I know," he laughed quietly.
I turned my head slightly… searching. He knew what I was after. His lips touched mine gently.
"Thanks," I sighed.
"Anytime."
I wasn't really there at all anymore. But I fought against the stupor weakly. There was just one more thing

stubbornly convinced that Edward was at fault — because, if not for him, I wouldn't have left home in the
first place. And Edward was far from disagreeing with him. These days I had rules that hadn't existed
before: curfews… visiting hours.
Something Charlie was saying made Edward's eyes widen in disbelief, and then a grin spread across his
face.
"You're kidding!" He laughed.
"What is it?" I demanded.
He ignored me. "Why don't you let me talk to him?" Edward suggested with evident pleasure. He waited
for a few seconds.
"Hello, Tyler, this is Edward Cullen." His voice was very friendly, on the surface. I knew it well enough to
catch the soft edge of menace. What was Tyler doing at my house? The awful truth began to dawn on
me. I looked again at the inappropriate dress Alice had forced me into.
"I'm sorry if there's been some kind of miscommunication, but Bella is unavailable tonight." Edward's tone
changed, and the threat in his voice was suddenly much more evident as he continued. "To be perfectly
honest, she'll be unavailable every night, as far as anyone besides myself is concerned. No offense. And
I'm sorry about your evening." He didn't sound sorry at all. And then he snapped the phone shut, a huge
smirk on his face.
My face and neck flushed crimson with anger. I could feel the rage-induced tears starting to fill my eyes.
He looked at me in surprise. "Was that last part a bit too much? I didn't mean to offend you."
I ignored that.
"You're taking me to the prom!" I yelled.
It was embarrassingly obvious now. If I'd been paying any attention at all, I'm sure I would have noticed
the date on the posters that decorated the school buildings. But I'd never dreamed he was thinking of
subjecting me to this. Didn't he know me at all?
He wasn't expecting the force of my reaction, that was clear. He pressed his lips together and his eyes
narrowed. "Don't be difficult, Bella."
My eyes flashed to the window; we were halfway to the school already.
"Why are you doing this to me?" I demanded in horror.
He gestured to his tuxedo. "Honestly, Bella, what did you think we were doing?"
I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions —
expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a beauty queen,
were so far wide of the mark. My half-fearful hopes seemed very silly now.
I'd guessed there was some kind of occasion brewing. But prom! That was the furthest thing from my
mind.
The angry tears rolled over my cheeks. I remembered with dismay that I was very uncharacteristically
wearing mascara. I wiped quickly under my eyes to prevent any smudges. My hand was unblackened
when I pulled it away; maybe Alice had known I would need waterproof makeup.

"This is completely ridiculous. Why are you crying?" he demanded in frustration.
"Because I'm mad!"
"Bella." He turned the full force of his scorching golden eyes on me.
"What?" I muttered, distracted.
"Humor me," he insisted.
His eyes were melting all my fury. It was impossible to fight with him when he cheated like that. I gave in
with poor grace.
"Fine," I pouted, unable to glare as effectively as I would have liked. "I'll go quietly. But you'll see. I'm
way overdue for more bad luck. I'll probably break my other leg. Look at this shoe! It's a death trap!" I
held out my good leg as evidence.
"Hmmm." He stared at my leg longer than was necessary. "Remind me to thank Alice for that tonight."
"Alice is going to be there?" That comforted me slightly.
"With Jasper, and Emmett… and Rosalie," he admitted.
The feeling of comfort disappeared. There had been no progress with Rosalie, though I was on quite
good terms with her sometimes-husband. Emmett enjoyed having me around — he thought my bizarre
human reactions were hilarious… or maybe it was just the fact that I fell down a lot that he found so
funny. Rosalie acted as if I didn't exist. While I shook my head to dispel the direction my thoughts had
taken, I thought of something else.
"Is Charlie in on this?" I asked, suddenly suspicious.
"Of course." He grinned, and then chuckled. "Apparently Tyler wasn't, though."
I gritted my teeth. How Tyler could be so delusional, I couldn't imagine. At school, where Charlie
couldn't interfere, Edward and I were inseparable — except for those rare sunny days.
We were at the school now; Rosalie's red convertible was conspicuous in the parking lot. The clouds
were thin today, a few streaks of sunlight escaping through far away in the west.
He got out and walked around the car to open my door. He held out his hand.
I sat stubbornly in my seat, arms folded, feeling a secret twinge of smugness. The lot was crowded with
people in formal dress: witnesses. He couldn't remove me forcibly from the car as he might have if we'd
been alone.
He sighed. "When someone wants to kill you, you're brave as a lion — and then when someone mentions
dancing…" He shook his head.
I gulped. Dancing.
"Bella, I won't let anything hurt you — not even yourself. I won't let go of you once, I promise."
I thought about that and suddenly felt much better. He could see that in my face.
"There, now," he said gently, "it won't be so bad." He leaned down and wrapped one arm around my

"Okay, this isn't half bad," I admitted.
But Edward was staring toward the doors, and his face was angry.
"What is it?" I wondered aloud. I followed his gaze, disoriented by the spinning, but finally I could see
what was bothering him. Jacob Black, not in a tux, but in a long-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair
smoothed back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us.
After the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help but feel bad for Jacob. He was clearly uncomfortable
— excruciatingly so. His face was apologetic as his eyes met mine.
Edward snarled very quietly.
"Behave!" I hissed.
Edward's voice was scathing. "He wants to chat with you."
Jacob reached us then, the embarrassment and apology even more evident on his face.
"Hey, Bella, I was hoping you would be here." Jacob sounded like he'd been hoping the exact opposite.
But his smile was just as warm as ever.
"Hi, Jacob." I smiled back. "What's up?"
"Can I cut in?" he asked tentatively, glancing at Edward for the first time. I was shocked to notice that
Jacob didn't have to look up. He must have grown half a foot since the first time I'd seen him.
Edward's face was composed, his expression blank. His only answer was to set me carefully on my feet,
and take a step back.
"Thanks," Jacob said amiably.
Edward just nodded, looking at me intently before he turned to walk away.
Jacob put his hands on my waist, and I reached up to put my hands on his shoulders.
"Wow, Jake, how tall are you now?"
He was smug. "Six-two."
We weren't really dancing — my leg made that impossible. Instead we swayed awkwardly from side to
side without moving our feet. It was just as well; the recent growth spurt had left him looking gangly and
uncoordinated, he was probably no better a dancer than I was.
"So, how did you end up here tonight?" I asked without true curiosity. Considering Edward's reaction, I
could guess.
"Can you believe my dad paid me twenty bucks to come to your prom?" he admitted, slightly ashamed.
"Yes, I can," I muttered. "Well, I hope you're enjoying yourself, at least. Seen anything you like?" I
teased, nodding toward a group of girls lined up against the wall like pastel confections.
"Yeah," he sighed. "But she's taken."
He glanced down to meet my curious gaze for just a second — then we both looked away,
embarrassed.

"You look really pretty, by the way," he added shyly.
"Um, thanks. So why did Billy pay you to come here?" I asked quickly, though I knew the answer.
Jacob didn't seem grateful for the subject change; he looked away, uncomfortable again. "He said it was
a 'safe' place to talk to you. I swear the old man is losing his mind."
I joined in his laughter weakly.
"Anyway, he said that if I told you something, he would get me that master cylinder I need," he confessed
with a sheepish grin.
"Tell me, then. I want you to get your car finished." I grinned back. At least Jacob didn't believe any of
this. It made the situation a bit easier. Against the wall, Edward was watching my face, his own face
expressionless. I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem
to be aware of her.
Jacob looked away again, ashamed. "Don't get mad, okay?"
"There's no way I'll be mad at you, Jacob," I assured him. "I won't even be mad at Billy. Just say what
you have to."
"Well — this is so stupid, I'm sorry, Bella — he wants you to break up with your boyfriend. He asked
me to tell you 'please.'" He shook his head in disgust.
"He's still superstitious, eh?"
"Yeah. He was… kind of over the top when you got hurt down in Phoenix. He didn't believe…"Jacob
trailed off self-consciously.
My eyes narrowed. "I fell."
"I know that," Jacob said quickly.
"He thinks Edward had something to do with me getting hurt." It wasn't a question, and despite my
promise, I was angry.
Jacob wouldn't meet my eyes. We weren't even bothering to sway to the music, though his hands were
still on my waist, and mine around his neck.
"Look, Jacob, I know Billy probably won't believe this, but just so you know" — he looked at me now,
responding to the new earnestness in my voice — "Edward really did save my life. If it weren't for
Edward and his father, I'd be dead."
"I know," he claimed, but he sounded like my sincere words had affected him some. Maybe he'd be able
to convince Billy of this much, at least.
"Hey, I'm sorry you had to come do this, Jacob," I apologized. "At any rate, you get your parts, right?"
"Yeah," he muttered. He was still looking awkward… upset.
"There's more?" I asked in disbelief.
"Forget it," he mumbled, "I'll get a job and save the money myself."

I glared at him until he met my gaze. "Just spit it out, Jacob."
"It's so bad."
"I don't care. Tell me," I insisted.
"Okay… but, geez, this sounds bad." He shook his head. "He said to tell you, no, to warn you, that —
and this is his plural, not mine" — he lifted one hand from my waist and made little quotations marks in
the air — '"We'll be watching.'" He watched warily for my reaction.
It sounded like something from a mafia movie. I laughed out loud.
"Sorry you had to do this, Jake," I snickered.
"I don't mind that much." He grinned in relief. His eyes were appraising as they raked quickly over my
dress. "So, should I tell him you said to butt the hell out?" he asked hopefully.
"No," I sighed. "Tell him I said thanks. I know he means well."
The song ended, and I dropped my arms.
His hands hesitated at my waist, and he glanced at my bum leg. "Do you want to dance again? Or can I
help you get somewhere?"
Edward answered for me. "That's all right, Jacob. I'll take it from here."
Jacob flinched, and stared wide-eyed at Edward, who stood just beside us.
"Hey, I didn't see you there," he mumbled. "I guess I'll see you around, Bella." He stepped back, waving
halfheartedly.
I smiled. "Yeah, I'll see you later."
"Sorry," he said again before he turned for the door.
Edward's arms wound around me as the next song started. It was a little up-tempo for slow dancing, but
that didn't seem to concern him. I leaned my head against his chest, content.
"Feeling better?" I teased.
"Not really," he said tersely.
"Don't be mad at Billy," I sighed. "He just worries about me for Charlie's sake. It's nothing personal."
"I'm not mad at Billy," he corrected in a clipped voice. "But his son is irritating me."
I pulled back to look at him. His face was very serious.
"Why?"
"First of all, he made me break my promise."
I stared at him in confusion.
He half-smiled. "I promised I wouldn't let go of you tonight," he explained.

The pain was back in his eyes. I bit my lip and nodded.
"So ready for this to be the end," he murmured, almost to himself, "for this to be the twilight of your life,
though your life has barely started. You're ready to give up everything."
"It's not the end, it's the beginning," I disagreed under my breath.
"I'm not worth it," he said sadly.
"Do you remember when you told me that I didn't see myself very clearly?" I asked, raising my
eyebrows. "You obviously have the same blindness."
"I know what I am."
I sighed.
But his mercurial mood shifted on me. He pursed his lips, and his eyes were probing. He examined my
face for a long moment.
"You're ready now, then?" he asked.
"Um." I gulped. "Yes?"
He smiled, and inclined his head slowly until his cold lips brushed against the skin just under the corner of
my jaw.
"Right now?" he whispered, his breath blowing cool on my neck. I shivered involuntarily.
"Yes," I whispered, so my voice wouldn't have a chance to break. If he thought I was bluffing, he was
going to be disappointed. I'd already made this decision, and I was sure. It didn't matter that my body
was rigid as a plank, my hands balled into fists, my breathing erratic…
He chuckled darkly, and leaned away. His face did look disappointed.
"You can't really believe that I would give in so easily," he said with a sour edge to his mocking tone.
"A girl can dream."
His eyebrows rose. "Is that what you dream about? Being a monster?"
"Not exactly," I said, frowning at his word choice. Monster, indeed. "Mostly I dream about being with
you forever."
His expression changed, softened and saddened by the subtle ache in my voice.
"Bella." His fingers lightly traced the shape of my lips. "I will stay with you — isn't that enough?"
I smiled under his fingertips. "Enough for now."
He frowned at my tenacity. No one was going to surrender tonight. He exhaled, and the sound was
practically a growl.
I touched his face. "Look," I said. "I love you more than everything else in the world combined. Isn't that
enough?"
"Yes, it is enough," he answered, smiling. "Enough for forever."

