My mother drove me to the airport with the windows rolled down. It was seventy-five degrees in
Phoenix, the sky a perfect, cloudless blue. I was wearing my favorite shirt — sleeveless, white eyelet
lace; I was wearing it as a farewell gesture. My carry-on item was a parka.
In the Olympic Peninsula of northwest Washington State, a small town named Forks exists under a
near-constant cover of clouds. It rains on this inconsequential town more than any other place in the
United States of America. It was from this town and its gloomy, omnipresent shade that my mother
escaped with me when I was only a few months old. It was in this town that I'd been compelled to spend
a month every summer until I was fourteen. That was the year I finally put my foot down; these past three
summers, my dad, Charlie, vacationed with me in California for two weeks instead.
It was to Forks that I now exiled myself— an action that I took with great horror. I detested Forks.
I loved Phoenix. I loved the sun and the blistering heat. I loved the vigorous, sprawling city.
"Bella," my mom said to me — the last of a thousand times — before I got on the plane. "You don't have
to do this."
My mom looks like me, except with short hair and laugh lines. I felt a spasm of panic as I stared at her
wide, childlike eyes. How could I leave my loving, erratic, harebrained mother to fend for herself? Of
course she had Phil now, so the bills would probably get paid, there would be food in the refrigerator,
gas in her car, and someone to call when she got lost, but still…
"I want to go," I lied. I'd always been a bad liar, but I'd been saying this lie so frequently lately that it
sounded almost convincing now.
"Tell Charlie I said hi."
"I will."
"I'll see you soon," she insisted. "You can come home whenever you want — I'll come right back as soon
as you need me."
But I could see the sacrifice in her eyes behind the promise.
"Don't worry about me," I urged. "It'll be great. I love you, Mom."

She hugged me tightly for a minute, and then I got on the plane, and she was gone.
It's a four-hour flight from Phoenix to Seattle, another hour in a small plane up to Port Angeles, and then
an hour drive back down to Forks. Flying doesn't bother me; the hour in the car with Charlie, though, I
was a little worried about.
Charlie had really been fairly nice about the whole thing. He seemed genuinely pleased that I was coming
to live with him for the first time with any degree of permanence. He'd already gotten me registered for
high school and was going to help me get a car.
But it was sure to be awkward with Charlie. Neither of us was what anyone would call verbose, and I
didn't know what there was to say regardless. I knew he was more than a little confused by my decision
— like my mother before me, I hadn't made a secret of my distaste for Forks.
When I landed in Port Angeles, it was raining. I didn't see it as an omen — just unavoidable. I'd already
said my goodbyes to the sun.
Charlie was waiting for me with the cruiser. This I was expecting, too. Charlie is Police Chief Swan to the
good people of Forks. My primary motivation behind buying a car, despite the scarcity of my funds, was
that I refused to be driven around town in a car with red and blue lights on top. Nothing slows down
traffic like a cop.
Charlie gave me an awkward, one-armed hug when I stumbled my way off the plane.
"It's good to see you, Bells," he said, smiling as he automatically caught and steadied me. "You haven't
changed much. How's Renée?"
"Mom's fine. It's good to see you, too, Dad." I wasn't allowed to call him Charlie to his face.
I had only a few bags. Most of my Arizona clothes were too permeable for Washington. My mom and I
had pooled our resources to supplement my winter wardrobe, but it was still scanty. It all fit easily into
the trunk of the cruiser.
"I found a good car for you, really cheap," he announced when we were strapped in.
"What kind of car?" I was suspicious of the way he said "good car for you" as opposed to just "good
car."
"Well, it's a truck actually, a Chevy."
"Where did you find it?"
"Do you remember Billy Black down at La Push?" La Push is the tiny Indian reservation on the coast.
"No."
"He used to go fishing with us during the summer," Charlie prompted.
That would explain why I didn't remember him. I do a good job of blocking painful, unnecessary things
from my memory.
"He's in a wheelchair now," Charlie continued when I didn't respond, "so he can't drive anymore, and he
offered to sell me his truck cheap."
"What year is it?" I could see from his change of expression that this was the question he was hoping I

wouldn't ask.
"Well, Billy's done a lot of work on the engine — it's only a few years old, really."
I hoped he didn't think so little of me as to believe I would give up that easily. "When did he buy it?"
"He bought it in 1984, I think."
"Did he buy it new?"
"Well, no. I think it was new in the early sixties — or late fifties at the earliest," he admitted sheepishly.
"Ch — Dad, I don't really know anything about cars. I wouldn't be able to fix it if anything went wrong,
and I couldn't afford a mechanic…"
"Really, Bella, the thing runs great. They don't build them like that anymore."
The thing, I thought to myself… it had possibilities — as a nickname, at the very least.
"How cheap is cheap?" After all, that was the part I couldn't compromise on.
"Well, honey, I kind of already bought it for you. As a homecoming gift." Charlie peeked sideways at me
with a hopeful expression.
Wow. Free.
"You didn't need to do that, Dad. I was going to buy myself a car."
"I don't mind. I want you to be happy here." He was looking ahead at the road when he said this. Charlie
wasn't comfortable with expressing his emotions out loud. I inherited that from him. So I was looking
straight ahead as I responded.
"That's really nice, Dad. Thanks. I really appreciate it." No need to add that my being happy in Forks is
an impossibility. He didn't need to suffer along with me. And I never looked a free truck in the mouth —
or engine.
"Well, now, you're welcome," he mumbled, embarrassed by my thanks.
We exchanged a few more comments on the weather, which was wet, and that was pretty much it for
Conversation. We stared out the windows in silence.
It was beautiful, of course; I couldn't deny that. Everything was green: the trees, their trunks covered with
moss, their branches hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with ferns. Even the air filtered
down greenly through the leaves.
It was too green — an alien planet.
Eventually we made it to Charlie's. He still lived in the small, two-bedroom house that he'd bought with
my mother in the early days of their marriage. Those were the only kind of days their marriage had — the
early ones. There, parked on the street in front of the house that never changed, was my new — well,
new to me — truck. It was a faded red color, with big, rounded fenders and a bulbous cab. To my
intense surprise, I loved it. I didn't know if it would run, but I could see myself in it. Plus, it was one of
those solid iron affairs that never gets damaged — the kind you see at the scene of an accident, paint
unscratched, surrounded by the pieces of the foreign car it had destroyed.

"Wow, Dad, I love it! Thanks!" Now my horrific day tomorrow would be just that much less dreadful. I
wouldn't be faced with the choice of either walking two miles in the rain to school or accepting a ride in
the Chief's cruiser.
"I'm glad you like it," Charlie said gruffly, embarrassed again.
It took only one trip to get all my stuff upstairs. I got the west bedroom that faced out over the front yard.
The room was familiar; it had been belonged to me since I was born. The wooden floor, the light blue
walls, the peaked ceiling, the yellowed lace curtains around the window — these were all a part of my
childhood. The only changes Charlie had ever made were switching the crib for a bed and adding a desk
as I grew. The desk now held a secondhand computer, with the phone line for the modem stapled along
the floor to the nearest phone jack. This was a stipulation from my mother, so that we could stay in touch
easily. The rocking chair from my baby days was still in the corner.
There was only one small bathroom at the top of the stairs, which I would have to share with Charlie. I
was trying not to dwell too much on that fact.
One of the best things about Charlie is he doesn't hover. He left me alone to unpack and get settled, a
feat that would have been altogether impossible for my mother. It was nice to be alone, not to have to
smile and look pleased; a relief to stare dejectedly out the window at the sheeting rain and let just a few
tears escape. I wasn't in the mood to go on a real crying jag. I would save that for bedtime, when I
would have to think about the coming morning.
Forks High School had a frightening total of only three hundred and fifty-seven — now fifty-eight —
students; there were more than seven hundred people in my junior class alone back home. All of the kids
here had grown up together — their grandparents had been toddlers together.
I would be the new girl from the big city, a curiosity, a freak.
Maybe, if I looked like a girl from Phoenix should, I could work this to my advantage. But physically, I'd
never fit in anywhere. I should be tan, sporty, blond — a volleyball player, or a cheerleader, perhaps —
all the things that go with living in the valley of the sun.
Instead, I was ivory-skinned, without even the excuse of blue eyes or red hair, despite the constant
sunshine. I had always been slender, but soft somehow, obviously not an athlete; I didn't have the
necessary hand-eye coordination to play sports without humiliating myself — and harming both myself
and anyone else who stood too close.
When I finished putting my clothes in the old pine dresser, I took my bag of bathroom necessities and
went to the communal bathroom to clean myself up after the day of travel. I looked at my face in the
mirror as I brushed through my tangled, damp hair. Maybe it was the light, but already I looked sallower,
unhealthy. My skin could be pretty — it was very clear, almost translucent-looking — but it all depended
on color. I had no color here.
Facing my pallid reflection in the mirror, I was forced to admit that I was lying to myself. It wasn't just
physically that I'd never fit in. And if I couldn't find a niche in a school with three thousand people, what
were my chances here?
I didn't relate well to people my age. Maybe the truth was that I didn't relate well to people, period. Even
my mother, who I was closer to than anyone else on the planet, was never in harmony with me, never on
exactly the same page. Sometimes I wondered if I was seeing the same things through my eyes that the
rest of the world was seeing through theirs. Maybe there was a glitch in my brain. But the cause didn't
matter. All that mattered was the effect. And tomorrow would be just the beginning.

I didn't sleep well that night, even after I was done crying. The constant whooshing of the rain and wind
across the roof wouldn't fade into the background. I pulled the faded old quilt over my head, and later
added the pillow, too. But I couldn't fall asleep until after midnight, when the rain finally settled into a
quieter drizzle.
Thick fog was all I could see out my window in the morning, and I could feel the claustrophobia creeping
up on me. You could never see the sky here; it was like a cage.
Breakfast with Charlie was a quiet event. He wished me good luck at school. I thanked him, knowing his
hope was wasted. Good luck tended to avoid me. Charlie left first, off to the police station that was his
wife and family. After he left, I sat at the old square oak table in one of the three unmatching chairs and
examined his small kitchen, with its dark paneled walls, bright yellow cabinets, and white linoleum floor.
Nothing was changed. My mother had painted the cabinets eighteen years ago in an attempt to bring
some sunshine into the house. Over the small fireplace in the adjoining handkerchief-sized family room
was a row of pictures. First a wedding picture of Charlie and my mom in Las Vegas, then one of the
three of us in the hospital after I was born, taken by a helpful nurse, followed by the procession of my
school pictures up to last year's. Those were embarrassing to look at — I would have to see what I
could do to get Charlie to put them somewhere else, at least while I was living here.
It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that Charlie had never gotten over my mom. It made
me uncomfortable.
I didn't want to be too early to school, but I couldn't stay in the house anymore. I donned my jacket —
which had the feel of a biohazard suit — and headed out into the rain.
It was just drizzling still, not enough to soak me through immediately as I reached for the house key that
was always hidden under the eaves by the door, and locked up. The sloshing of my new waterproof
boots was unnerving. I missed the normal crunch of gravel as I walked. I couldn't pause and admire my
truck again as I wanted; I was in a hurry to get out of the misty wet that swirled around my head and
clung to my hair under my hood.
Inside the truck, it was nice and dry. Either Billy or Charlie had obviously cleaned it up, but the tan
upholstered seats still smelled faintly of tobacco, gasoline, and peppermint. The engine started quickly, to
my relief, but loudly, roaring to life and then idling at top volume. Well, a truck this old was bound to
have a flaw. The antique radio worked, a plus that I hadn't expected.
Finding the school wasn't difficult, though I'd never been there before. The school was, like most other
things, just off the highway. It was not obvious that it was a school; only the sign, which declared it to be
the Forks High School, made me stop. It looked like a collection of matching houses, built with
maroon-colored bricks. There were so many trees and shrubs I couldn't see its size at first. Where was
the feel of the institution? I wondered nostalgically. Where were the chain-link fences, the metal
detectors?
I parked in front of the first building, which had a small sign over the door reading front office. No one
else was parked there, so I was sure it was off limits, but I decided I would get directions inside instead
of circling around in the rain like an idiot. I stepped unwillingly out of the toasty truck cab and walked
down a little stone path lined with dark hedges. I took a deep breath before opening the door.
Inside, it was brightly lit, and warmer than I'd hoped. The office was small; a little waiting area with
padded folding chairs, orange-flecked commercial carpet, notices and awards cluttering the walls, a big
clock ticking loudly. Plants grew everywhere in large plastic pots, as if there wasn't enough greenery

outside. The room was cut in half by a long counter, cluttered with wire baskets full of papers and
brightly colored flyers taped to its front. There were three desks behind the counter, one of which was
manned by a large, red-haired woman wearing glasses. She was wearing a purple t-shirt, which
immediately made me feel overdressed.
The red-haired woman looked up. "Can I help you?"
"I'm Isabella Swan," I informed her, and saw the immediate awareness light her eyes. I was expected, a
topic of gossip no doubt. Daughter of the Chief's flighty ex-wife, come home at last.
"Of course," she said. She dug through a precariously stacked pile of documents on her desk till she
found the ones she was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the school." She
brought several sheets to the counter to show roe.
She went through my classes for me, highlighting the best route to each on the map, and gave me a slip to
have each teacher sign, which I was to bring back at the end of the day. She smiled at me and hoped,
like Charlie, that I would like it here in Forks. I smiled back as convincingly as I could.
When I went back out to my truck, other students were starting to arrive. I drove around the school,
following the line of traffic. I was glad to see that most of the cars were older like mine, nothing flashy. At
home I'd lived in one of the few lower-income neighborhoods that were included in the Paradise Valley
District. It was a common thing to see a new Mercedes or Porsche in the student lot. The nicest car here
was a shiny Volvo, and it stood out. Still, I cut the engine as soon as I was in a spot, so that the
thunderous volume wouldn't draw attention to me.
I looked at the map in the truck, trying to memorize it now; hopefully I wouldn't have to walk around with
it stuck in front of my nose all day. I stuffed everything in my bag, slung the strap over my shoulder, and
sucked in a huge breath. I can do this, I lied to myself feebly. No one was going to bite me. I finally
exhaled and stepped out of the truck.
I kept my face pulled back into my hood as I walked to the sidewalk, crowded with teenagers. My plain
black jacket didn't stand out, I noticed with relief.
Once I got around the cafeteria, building three was easy to spot. A large black "3" was painted on a
white square on the east corner. I felt my breathing gradually creeping toward hyperventilation as I
approached the door. I tried holding my breath as I followed two unisex raincoats through the door.
The classroom was small. The people in front of me stopped just inside the door to hang up their coats
on a long row of hooks. I copied them. They were two girls, one a porcelain-colored blonde, the other
also pale, with light brown hair. At least my skin wouldn't be a standout here.
I took the slip up to the teacher, a tall, balding man whose desk had a nameplate identifying him as Mr.
Mason. He gawked at me when he saw my name — not an encouraging response — and of course I
flushed tomato red. But at least he sent me to an empty desk at the back without introducing me to the
class. It was harder for my new classmates to stare at me in the back, but somehow, they managed. I
kept my eyes down on the reading list the teacher had given me. It was fairly basic: Bronte, Shakespeare,
Chaucer, Faulkner. I'd already read everything. That was comforting… and boring. I wondered if my
mom would send me my folder of old essays, or if she would think that was cheating. I went through
different arguments with her in my head while the teacher droned on.
When the bell rang, a nasal buzzing sound, a gangly boy with skin problems and hair black as an oil slick
leaned across the aisle to talk to me.

"He's a weird guy." Mike lingered by me instead of heading to the dressing room. "If I were lucky enough
to sit by you, I would have talked to you."
I smiled at him before walking through the girls' locker room door. He was friendly and clearly admiring.
But it wasn't enough to ease my irritation.
The Gym teacher, Coach Clapp, found me a uniform but didn't make me dress down for today's class.
At home, only two years of RE. were required. Here, P.E. was mandatory all four years. Forks was
literally my personal hell on Earth.
I watched four volleyball games running simultaneously. Remembering how many injuries I had sustained
— and inflicted — playing volleyball, I felt faintly nauseated.
The final bell rang at last. I walked slowly to the office to return my paperwork. The rain had drifted
away, but the wind was strong, and colder. I wrapped my arms around myself.
When I walked into the warm office, I almost turned around and walked back out.
Edward Cullen stood at the desk in front of me. I recognized again that tousled bronze hair. He didn't
appear to notice the sound of my entrance. I stood pressed against the back wall, waiting for the
receptionist to be free.
He was arguing with her in a low, attractive voice. I quickly picked up the gist of the argument. He was
trying to trade from sixth-hour Biology to another time — any other time.
I just couldn't believe that this was about me. It had to be something else, something that happened
before I entered the Biology room. The look on his face must have been about another aggravation
entirely. It was impossible that this stranger could take such a sudden, intense dislike to me.
The door opened again, and the cold wind suddenly gusted through the room, rustling the papers on the
desk, swirling my hair around my face. The girl who came in merely stepped to the desk, placed a note in
the wire basket, and walked out again. But Edward Cullen's back stiffened, and he turned slowly to glare
at me — his face was absurdly handsome — with piercing, hate-filled eyes. For an instant, I felt a thrill of
genuine fear, raising the hair on my arms. The look only lasted a second, but it chilled me more than the
freezing wind. He turned back to the receptionist.
"Never mind, then," he said hastily in a voice like velvet. "I can see that it's impossible. Thank you so
much for your help." And he turned on his heel without another look at me, and disappeared out the
door.
I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip.
"How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally.
"Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced.
When I got to the truck, it was almost the last car in the lot. It seemed like a haven, already the closest
thing to home I had in this damp green hole. I sat inside for a while, just staring out the windshield
blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned the key and the engine roared to life.
I headed back to Charlie's house, fighting tears the whole way there.

The next day was better… and worse.
It was better because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier
because I knew what to expect of my day. Mike came to sit by me in English, and walked me to my next
class, with Chess Club Eric glaring at him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me quite
as much as they had yesterday. I sat with a big group at lunch that included Mike, Eric, Jessica, and
several other people whose names and faces I now remembered. I began to feel like I was treading
water, instead of drowning in it.
It was worse because I was tired; I still couldn't sleep with the wind echoing around the house. It was
worse because Mr. Varner called on me in Trig when my hand wasn't raised and I had the wrong
answer. It was miserable because I had to play volleyball, and the one time I didn't cringe out of the way
of the ball, I hit my teammate in the head with it. And it was worse because Edward Cullen wasn't in
school at all.
All morning I was dreading lunch, fearing his bizarre glares. Part of me wanted to confront him and
demand to know what his problem was. While I was lying sleepless in my bed, I even imagined what I
would say. But I knew myself too well to think I would really have the guts to do it. I made the Cowardly
Lion look like the terminator.
But when I walked into the cafeteria with Jessica — trying to keep my eyes from sweeping the place for
him, and failing entirely — I saw that his four siblings of sorts were sitting together at the same table, and
he was not with them.
Mike intercepted us and steered us to his table. Jessica seemed elated by the attention, and her friends
quickly joined us. But as I tried to listen to their easy chatter, I was terribly uncomfortable, waiting
nervously for the moment he would arrive. I hoped that he would simply ignore me when he came, and
prove my suspicions false.
He didn't come, and as time passed I grew more and more tense.
I walked to Biology with more confidence when, by the end of lunch, he still hadn't showed. Mike, who
was taking on the qualities of a golden retriever, walked faithfully by my side to class. I held my breath at
the door, but Edward Cullen wasn't there, either. I exhaled and went to my seat. Mike followed, talking
about an upcoming trip to the beach. He lingered by my desk till the bell rang. Then he smiled at me
wistfully and went to sit by a girl with braces and a bad perm. It looked like I was going to have to do
something about Mike, and it wouldn't be easy. In a town like this, where everyone lived on top of
everyone else, diplomacy was essential. I had never been enormously tactful; I had no practice dealing
with overly friendly boys.
I was relieved that I had the desk to myself, that Edward was absent. I told myself that repeatedly. But I
couldn't get rid of the nagging suspicion that I was the reason he wasn't there. It was ridiculous, and
egotistical, to think that I could affect anyone that strongly. It was impossible. And yet I couldn't stop
worrying that it was true.
When the school day was finally done, and the blush was fading out of my cheeks from the volleyball
incident, I changed quickly back into my jeans and navy blue sweater. I hurried from the girls' locker
room, pleased to find that I had successfully evaded my retriever friend for the moment. I walked swiftly
out to the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in my truck and dug through my
bag to make sure I had what I needed.
Last night I'd discovered that Charlie couldn't cook much besides fried eggs and bacon. So I requested

that I be assigned kitchen detail for the duration of my stay. He was willing enough to hand over the keys
to the banquet hall. I also found out that he had no food in the house. So I had my shopping list and the
cash from the jar in the cupboard labeled FOOD MONEY, and I was on my way to the Thriftway.
I gunned my deafening engine to life, ignoring the heads that turned in my direction, and backed carefully
into a place in the line of cars that were waiting to exit the parking lot. As I waited, trying to pretend that
the earsplitting rumble was coming from someone else's car, I saw the two Cullens and the Hale twins
getting into their car. It was the shiny new Volvo. Of course. I hadn't noticed their clothes before — I'd
been too mesmerized by their faces. Now that I looked, it was obvious that they were all dressed
exceptionally well; simply, but in clothes that subtly hinted at designer origins. With their remarkable good
looks, the style with which they carried themselves, they could have worn dishrags and pulled it off. It
seemed excessive for them to have both looks and money. But as far as I could tell, life worked that way
most of the time. It didn't look as if it bought them any acceptance here.
No, I didn't fully believe that. The isolation must be their desire; I couldn't imagine any door that wouldn't
be opened by that degree of beauty.
They looked at my noisy truck as I passed them, just like everyone else. I kept my eyes straight forward
and was relieved when I finally was free of the school grounds.
The Thriftway was not far from the school, just a few streets south, off the highway. It was nice to be
inside the supermarket; it felt normal. I did the shopping at home, and I fell into the pattern of the familiar
task gladly. The store was big enough inside that I couldn't hear the tapping of the rain on the roof to
remind me where I was.
When I got home, I unloaded all the groceries, stuffing them in wherever I could find an open space. I
hoped Charlie wouldn't mind. I wrapped potatoes in foil and stuck them in the oven to bake, covered a
steak in marinade and balanced it on top of a carton of eggs in the fridge.
When I was finished with that, I took my book bag upstairs. Before starting my homework, I changed
into a pair of dry sweats, pulled my damp hair up into a pony-tail, and checked my e-mail for the first
time. I had three messages.
"Bella," my mom wrote…

Isabella,
If I haven't heard from you by 5:30 p.m. today I'm calling Charlie.

Mom,
Everything is great. Of course it's raining. I was waiting for something to write about. School
isn't bad, just a little repetitive. I met some nice kids who sit by me at lunch.
Your blouse is at the dry cleaners - you were supposed to pick it up Friday.
Charlie bought me a truck, can you believe it? I love it. It's old, but really sturdy, which is
good, you know, for me.
I miss you, too. I'll write again soon, but I'm not going to check my e-mail every five minutes.
Relax, breathe. I love you.
Bella.

I had decided to read Wuthering Heights — the novel we were currently studying in English — yet
again for the fun of it, and that's what I was doing when Charlie came home. I'd lost track of the time,
and I hurried downstairs to take the potatoes out and put the steak in to broil.
"Bella?" my father called out when he heard me on the stairs.
Who else? I thought to myself.
"Hey, Dad, welcome home."
"Thanks." He hung up his gun belt and stepped out of his boots as I bustled about the kitchen. As far as I
was aware, he'd never shot the gun on the job. But he kept it ready. When I came here as a child, he
would always remove the bullets as soon as he walked in the door. I guess he considered me old enough
now not to shoot myself by accident, and not depressed enough to shoot myself on purpose.
"What's for dinner?" he asked warily. My mother was an imaginative cook, and her experiments weren't

always edible. I was surprised, and sad, that he seemed to remember that far back.
"Steak and potatoes," I answered, and he looked relieved.
He seemed to feel awkward standing in the kitchen doing nothing; he lumbered into the living room to
watch TV while I worked. We were both more comfortable that way. I made a salad while the steaks
cooked, and set the table.
I called him in when dinner was ready, and he sniffed appreciatively as he walked into the room.
"Smells good, Bell."
"Thanks."
We ate in silence for a few minutes. It wasn't uncomfortable. Neither of us was bothered by the quiet. In
some ways, we were well suited for living together.
"So, how did you like school? Have you made any friends?" he asked as he was taking seconds.
"Well, I have a few classes with a girl named Jessica. I sit with her friends at lunch. And there's this boy,
Mike, who's very friendly. Everybody seems pretty nice." With one outstanding exception.
"That must be Mike Newton. Nice kid — nice family. His dad owns the sporting goods store just outside
of town. He makes a good living off all the backpackers who come through here."
"Do you know the Cullen family?" I asked hesitantly.
"Dr. Cullen's family? Sure. Dr. Cullen's a great man."
"They… the kids… are a little different. They don't seem to fit in very well at school."
Charlie surprised me by looking angry.
"People in this town," he muttered. "Dr. Cullen is a brilliant surgeon who could probably work in any
hospital in the world, make ten times the salary he gets here," he continued, getting louder. "We're lucky
to have him — lucky that his wife wanted to live in a small town. He's an asset to the community, and all
of those kids are well behaved and polite. I had my doubts, when they first moved in, with all those
adopted teenagers. I thought we might have some problems with them. But they're all very mature — I
haven't had one speck of trouble from any of them. That's more than I can say for the children of some
folks who have lived in this town for generations. And they stick together the way a family should —
camping trips every other weekend… Just because they're newcomers, people have to talk."
It was the longest speech I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people
were saying.
I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I just noticed they kept to themselves. They're all very
attractive," I added, trying to be more complimentary.
"You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the
nurses at the hospital have a hard time concentrating on their work with him around."
We lapsed back into silence as we finished eating. He cleared the table while I started on the dishes. He
went back to the TV, and after I finished washing the dishes by hand — no dishwasher — I went
upstairs unwillingly to work on my math homework. I could feel a tradition in the making.

That night it was finally quiet. I fell asleep quickly, exhausted.
The rest of the week was uneventful. I got used to the routine of my classes. By Friday I was able to
recognize, if not name, almost all the students at school. In Gym, the kids on my team learned not to pass
me the ball and to step quickly in front of me if the other team tried to take advantage of my weakness. I
happily stayed out of their way.
Edward Cullen didn't come back to school.
Every day, I watched anxiously until the rest of the Cullens entered the cafeteria without him. Then I
could relax and join in the lunchtime conversation. Mostly it centered around a trip to the La Push Ocean
Park in two weeks that Mike was putting together. I was invited, and I had agreed to go, more out of
politeness than desire. Beaches should be hot and dry.
By Friday I was perfectly comfortable entering my Biology class, no longer worried that Edward would
be there. For all I knew, he had dropped out of school. I tried not to think about him, but I couldn't
totally suppress the worry that I was responsible for his continued absence, ridiculous as it seemed.
My first weekend in Forks passed without incident. Charlie, unused to spending time in the usually empty
house, worked most of the weekend. I cleaned the house, got ahead on my homework, and wrote my
mom more bogusly cheerful e-mail. I did drive to the library Saturday, but it was so poorly stocked that I
didn't bother to get a card; I would have to make a date to visit Olympia or Seattle soon and find a good
bookstore. I wondered idly what kind of gas mileage the truck got… and shuddered at the thought.
The rain stayed soft over the weekend, quiet, so I was able to sleep well.
People greeted me in the parking lot Monday morning. I didn't know all their names, but I waved back
and smiled at everyone. It was colder this morning, but happily not raining. In English, Mike took his
accustomed seat by my side. We had a pop quiz on Wuthering Heights. It was straightforward, very
easy.
All in all, I was feeling a lot more comfortable than I had thought I would feel by this point. More
comfortable than I had ever expected to feel here.
When we walked out of class, the air was full of swirling bits of white. I could hear people shouting
excitedly to each other. The wind bit at my cheeks, my nose.
"Wow," Mike said. "It's snowing."
I looked at the little cotton fluffs that were building up along the sidewalk and swirling erratically past my
face.
"Ew." Snow. There went my good day.
He looked surprised. "Don't you like snow?"
"No. That means it's too cold for rain." Obviously. "Besides, I thought it was supposed to come down in
flakes — you know, each one unique and all that. These just look like the ends of Q-tips."
"Haven't you ever seen snow fall before?" he asked incredulously.
"Sure I have." I paused. "On TV."
Mike laughed. And then a big, squishy ball of dripping snow smacked into the back of his head. We both

I looked up, stunned that he was speaking to me. He was sitting as far away from me as the desk
allowed, but his chair was angled toward me. His hair was dripping wet, disheveled — even so, he
looked like he'd just finished shooting a commercial for hair gel. His dazzling face was friendly, open, a
slight smile on his flawless lips. But his eyes were careful.
"My name is Edward Cullen," he continued. "I didn't have a chance to introduce myself last week. You
must be Bella Swan."
My mind was spinning with confusion. Had I made up the whole thing? He was perfectly polite now. I
had to speak; he was waiting. But I couldn't think of anything conventional to say.
"H-how do you know my name?" I stammered.
He laughed a soft, enchanting laugh.
"Oh, I think everyone knows your name. The whole town's been waiting for you to arrive."
I grimaced. I knew it was something like that.
"No," I persisted stupidly. "I meant, why did you call me Bella?"
He seemed confused. "Do you prefer Isabella?"
"No, I like Bella," I said. "But I think Charlie — I mean my dad — must call me Isabella behind my back
— that's what everyone here seems to know me as," I tried to explain, feeling like an utter moron.
"Oh." He let it drop. I looked away awkwardly.
Thankfully, Mr. Banner started class at that moment. I tried to concentrate as he explained the lab we
would be doing today. The slides in the box were out of order. Working as lab partners, we had to
separate the slides of onion root tip cells into the phases of mitosis they represented and label them
accordingly. We weren't supposed to use our books. In twenty minutes, he would be coming around to
see who had it right.
"Get started," he commanded.
"Ladies first, partner?" Edward asked. I looked up to see him smiling a crooked smile so beautiful that I
could only stare at him like an idiot.
"Or I could start, if you wish." The smile faded; he was obviously wondering if I was mentally competent.
"No," I said, flushing. "I'll go ahead."
I was showing off, just a little. I'd already done this lab, and I knew what I was looking for. It should be
easy. I snapped the first slide into place under the microscope and adjusted it quickly to the 40X
objective. I studied the slide briefly.
My assessment was confident. "Prophase."
"Do you mind if I look?" he asked as I began to remove the slide. His hand caught mine, to stop me, as
he asked. His fingers were ice-cold, like he'd been holding them in a snowdrift before class. But that
wasn't why I jerked my hand away so quickly. When he touched me, it stung my hand as if an electric
current had passed through us.
"I'm sorry," he muttered, pulling his hand back immediately. However, he continued to reach for the

story was somehow vitally important.
"Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled.
"Have I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response.
"Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot."
"And your mother sent you here so that she could travel with him." He said it as an assumption again, not
a question.
My chin raised a fraction. "No, she did not send me here. I sent myself."
His eyebrows knit together. "I don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed unnecessarily frustrated by
that fact.
I sighed. Why was I explaining this to him? He continued to stare at me with obvious curiosity.
"She stayed with me at first, but she missed him. It made her unhappy… so I decided it was time to
spend some quality time with Charlie." My voice was glum by the time I finished.
"But now you're unhappy," he pointed out.
"And?" I challenged.
"That doesn't seem fair." He shrugged, but his eyes were still intense.
I laughed without humor. "Hasn't anyone ever told you? Life isn't fair."
"I believe I have heard that somewhere before," he agreed dryly.
"So that's all," I insisted, wondering why he was still staring at me that way.
His gaze became appraising. "You put on a good show," he said slowly. "But I'd be willing to bet that
you're suffering more than you let anyone see."
I grimaced at him, resisting the impulse to stick out my tongue like a five-year-old, and looked away.
"Am I wrong?"
I tried to ignore him.
"I didn't think so," he murmured smugly.
"Why does it matter to you?" I asked, irritated. I kept my eyes away, watching the teacher make his
rounds.
"That's a very good question," he muttered, so quietly that I wondered if he was talking to himself.
However, after a few seconds of silence, I decided that was the only answer I was going to get.
I sighed, scowling at the blackboard.
"Am I annoying you?" he asked. He sounded amused.
I glanced at him without thinking… and told the truth again. "Not exactly. I'm more annoyed at myself.
My face is so easy to read — my mother always calls me her open book." I frowned.

It was the light. It was still the gray-green light of a cloudy day in the forest, but it was clearer somehow. I
realized there was no fog veiling my window.
I jumped up to look outside, and then groaned in horror.
A fine layer of snow covered the yard, dusted the top of my truck, and whitened the road. But that
wasn't the worst part. All the rain from yesterday had frozen solid — coating the needles on the trees in
fantastic, gorgeous patterns, and making the driveway a deadly ice slick. I had enough trouble not falling
down when the ground was dry; it might be safer for me to go back to bed now.
Charlie had left for work before I got downstairs. In a lot of ways, living with Charlie was like having my
own place, and I found myself reveling in the aloneness instead of being lonely.
I threw down a quick bowl of cereal and some orange juice from the carton. I felt excited to go to
school, and that scared me. I knew it wasn't the stimulating learning environment I was anticipating, or
seeing my new set of friends. If I was being honest with myself, I knew I was eager to get to school
because I would see Edward Cullen. And that was very, very stupid.
I should be avoiding him entirely after my brainless and embarrassing babbling yesterday. And I was
suspicious of him; why should he lie about his eyes? I was still frightened of the hostility I sometimes felt
emanating from him, and I was still tongue-tied whenever I pictured his perfect face. I was well aware
that my league and his league were spheres that did not touch. So I shouldn't be at all anxious to see him
today.
It took every ounce of my concentration to make it down the icy brick driveway alive. I almost lost my
balance when I finally got to the truck, but I managed to cling to the side mirror and save myself. Clearly,
today was going to be nightmarish.
Driving to school, I distracted myself from my fear of falling and my unwanted speculations about
Edward Cullen by thinking about Mike and Eric, and the obvious difference in how teenage boys
responded to me here. I was sure I looked exactly the same as I had in Phoenix. Maybe it was just that
the boys back home had watched me pass slowly through all the awkward phases of adolescence and
still thought of me that way. Perhaps it was because I was a novelty here, where novelties were few and
far between. Possibly my crippling clumsiness was seen as endearing rather than pathetic, casting me as a
damsel in distress. Whatever the reason, Mike's puppy dog behavior and Eric's apparent rivalry with him
were disconcerting. I wasn't sure if I didn't prefer being ignored.
My truck seemed to have no problem with the black ice that covered the roads. I drove very slowly,
though, not wanting to carve a path of destruction through Main Street.
When I got out of my truck at school, I saw why I'd had so little trouble. Something silver caught my eye,
and I walked to the back of the truck — carefully holding the side for support — to examine my tires.
There were thin chains crisscrossed in diamond shapes around them. Charlie had gotten up who knows
how early to put snow chains on my truck. My throat suddenly felt tight. I wasn't used to being taken
care of, and Charlie's unspoken concern caught me by surprise.
I was standing by the back corner of the truck, struggling to fight back the sudden wave of emotion the
snow chains had brought on, when I heard an odd sound.
It was a high-pitched screech, and it was fast becoming painfully loud. I looked up, startled.
I saw several things simultaneously. Nothing was moving in slow motion, the way it does in the movies.
Instead, the adrenaline rush seemed to make my brain work much faster, and I was able to absorb in

Edward lifted a hand to stop him.
"No blood, no foul," he said, flashing his brilliant teeth. He moved to sit on the edge of Tyler's bed, facing
me. He smirked again.
"So, what's the verdict?" he asked me.
"There's nothing wrong with me at all, but they won't let me go," I complained. "How come you aren't
strapped to a gurney like the rest of us?"
"It's all about who you know," he answered. "But don't worry, I came to spring you."
Then a doctor walked around the corner, and my mouth fell open. He was young, he was blond… and
he was handsomer than any movie star I'd ever seen. He was pale, though, and tired-looking, with circles
under his eyes. From Charlie's description, this had to be Edward's father.
"So, Miss Swan," Dr. Cullen said in a remarkably appealing voice, "how are you feeling?"
"I'm fine," I said, for the last time, I hoped.
He walked to the lightboard on the wall over my head, and turned it on.
"Your X-rays look good," he said. "Does your head hurt? Edward said you hit it pretty hard."
"It's fine," I repeated with a sigh, throwing a quick scowl toward Edward.
The doctor's cool fingers probed lightly along my skull. He noticed when I winced.
"Tender?" he asked.
"Not really." I'd had worse.
I heard a chuckle, and looked over to see Edward's patronizing smile. My eyes narrowed.
"Well, your father is in the waiting room — you can go home with him now. But come back if you feel
dizzy or have trouble with your eyesight at all."
"Can't I go back to school?" I asked, imagining Charlie trying to be attentive.
"Maybe you should take it easy today."
I glanced at Edward. "Does he get to go to school?"
"Someone has to spread the good news that we survived," Edward said smugly.
"Actually," Dr. Cullen corrected, "most of the school seems to be in the waiting room."
"Oh no," I moaned, covering my face with my hands.
Dr. Cullen raised his eyebrows. "Do you want to stay?"
"No, no!" I insisted, throwing my legs over the side of the bed and hopping down quickly. Too quickly
— I staggered, and Dr. Cullen caught me. He looked concerned.
"I'm fine," I assured him again. No need to tell him my balance problems had nothing to do with hitting my
head.

He was staring at me incredulously. But his face was tense, defensive.
"You think I lifted a van off you?" His tone questioned my sanity, but it only made me more suspicious. It
was like a perfectly delivered line by a skilled actor.
I merely nodded once, jaw tight.
"Nobody will believe that, you know." His voice held an edge of derision now.
"I'm not going to tell anybody." I said each word slowly, carefully controlling my anger.
Surprise flitted across his face. "Then why does it matter?"
"It matters to me," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good reason why I'm doing it."
"Can't you just thank me and get over it?"
"Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant.
"You're not going to let it go, are you?"
"No."
"In that case… I hope you enjoy disappointment."
We scowled at each other in silence. I was the first to speak, trying to keep myself focused. I was in
danger of being distracted by his livid, glorious face. It was like trying to stare down a destroying angel.
"Why did you even bother?" I asked frigidly.
He paused, and for a brief moment his stunning face was unexpectedly vulnerable.
"I don't know," he whispered.
And then he turned his back on me and walked away.
I was so angry, it took me a few minutes until I could move. When I could walk, I made my way slowly
to the exit at the end of the hallway.
The waiting room was more unpleasant than I'd feared. It seemed like every face I knew in Forks was
there, staring at me. Charlie rushed to my side; I put up my hands.
"There's nothing wrong with me," I assured him sullenly. I was still aggravated, not in the mood for
chitchat.
"What did the doctor say?"
"Dr. Cullen saw me, and he said I was fine and I could go home." I sighed. Mike and Jessica and Eric
were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged.
Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me to the glass doors of the exit. I
waved sheepishly at my friends, hoping to convey that they didn't need to worry anymore. It was a huge
relief— the first time I'd ever felt that way — to get into the cruiser.
We drove in silence. I was so wrapped up in my thoughts that I barely knew Charlie was there. I was
positive that Edward's defensive behavior in the hall was a confirmation of the bizarre things I still could

hardly believe I'd witnessed.
When we got to the house, Charlie finally spoke.
"Um… you'll need to call Renée." He hung his head, guilty.
I was appalled. "You told Mom!"
"Sorry."
I slammed the cruiser's door a little harder than necessary on my way out.
My mom was in hysterics, of course. I had to tell her I felt fine at least thirty times before she would calm
down. She begged me to come home — forgetting the fact that home was empty at the moment — but
her pleas were easier to resist than I would have thought. I was consumed by the mystery Edward
presented. And more than a little obsessed by Edward himself. Stupid, stupid, stupid. I wasn't as eager
to escape Forks as I should be, as any normal, sane person would be.
I decided I might as well go to bed early that night. Charlie continued to watch me anxiously, and it was
getting on my nerves. I stopped on my way to grab three Tylenol from the bathroom. They did help, and,
as the pain eased, I drifted to sleep.
That was the first night I dreamed of Edward Cullen.

acknowledge him.
While I was sitting there, looking everywhere but at the car in front of me, I heard a knock on my
passenger side window. I looked over; it was Tyler. I glanced back in my rearview mirror, confused. His
car was still running, the door left open. I leaned across the cab to crank the window down. It was stiff. I
got it halfway down, then gave up.
"I'm sorry, Tyler, I'm stuck behind Cullen." I was annoyed — obviously the holdup wasn't my fault.
"Oh, I know — I just wanted to ask you something while we're trapped here." He grinned.
This could not be happening.
"Will you ask me to the spring dance?" he continued.
"I'm not going to be in town, Tyler." My voice sounded a little sharp. I had to remember it wasn't his fault
that Mike and Eric had already used up my quota of patience for the day.
"Yeah, Mike said that," he admitted.
"Then why —"
He shrugged. "I was hoping you were just letting him down easy."
Okay, it was completely his fault.
"Sorry, Tyler," I said, working to hide my irritation. "I really am going out of town."
"That's cool. We still have prom."
And before I could respond, he was walking back to his car. I could feel the shock on my face. I looked
forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper all sliding into the Volvo. In his rearview mirror,
Edward's eyes were on me. He was unquestionably shaking with laughter, as if he'd heard every word
Tyler had said. My foot itched toward the gas pedal… one little bump wouldn't hurt any of them, just that
glossy silver paint job. I revved the engine.
But they were all in, and Edward was speeding away. I drove home slowly, carefully, muttering to myself
the whole way.
When I got home, I decided to make chicken enchiladas for dinner. It was a long process, and it would
keep me busy. While I was simmering the onions and chilies, the phone rang. I was almost afraid to
answer it, but it might be Charlie or my mom.
It was Jessica, and she was jubilant; Mike had caught her after school to accept her invitation. I
celebrated with her briefly while I stirred. She had to go, she wanted to call Angela and Lauren to tell
them. I suggested — with casual innocence — that maybe Angela, the shy girl who had Biology with me,
could ask Eric. And Lauren, a standoffish girl who had always ignored me at the lunch table, could ask
Tyler; I'd heard he was still available. Jess thought that was a great idea. Now that she was sure of Mike,
she actually sounded sincere when she said she wished I would go to the dance. I gave her my Seattle
excuse.
After I hung up, I tried to concentrate on dinner — dicing the chicken especially; I didn't want to take
another trip to the emergency room. But my head was spinning, trying to analyze every word Edward
had spoken today. What did he mean, it was better if we weren't friends?

My stomach twisted as I realized what he must have meant. He must see how absorbed I was by him; he
must not want to lead me on… so we couldn't even be friends… because he wasn't interested in me at
all.
Of course he wasn't interested in me, I thought angrily, my eyes stinging — a delayed reaction to the
onions. I wasn't interesting. And he was. Interesting… and brilliant… and mysterious… and perfect…
and beautiful… and possibly able to lift full-sized vans with one hand.
Well, that was fine. I could leave him alone. I would leave him alone. I would get through my
self-imposed sentence here in purgatory, and then hopefully some school in the Southwest, or possibly
Hawaii, would offer me a scholarship. I focused my thoughts on sunny beaches and palm trees as I
finished the enchiladas and put them in the oven.
Charlie seemed suspicious when he came home and smelled the green peppers. I couldn't blame him —
the closest edible Mexican food was probably in southern California. But he was a cop, even if just a
small-town cop, so he was brave enough to take the first bite. He seemed to like it. It was fun to watch
as he slowly began trusting me in the kitchen.
"Dad?" I asked when he was almost done.
"Yeah, Bella?"
"Um, I just wanted to let you know that I'm going to Seattle for the day a week from Saturday… if that's
okay?" I didn't want to ask permission — it set a bad precedent — but I felt rude, so I tacked it on at
the end.
"Why?" He sounded surprised, as if he were unable to imagine something that Forks couldn't offer.
"Well, I wanted to get few books — the library here is pretty limited — and maybe look at some
clothes." I had more money than I was used to having, since, thanks to Charlie, I hadn't had to pay for a
car. Not that the truck didn't cost me quite a bit in the gas department.
"That truck probably doesn't get very good gas mileage," he said, echoing my thoughts.
"I know, I'll stop in Montesano and Olympia — and Tacoma if I have to."
"Are you going all by yourself?" he asked, and I couldn't tell if he was suspicious I had a secret boyfriend
or just worried about car trouble.
"Yes."
"Seattle is a big city — you could get lost," he fretted.
"Dad, Phoenix is five times the size of Seattle — and I can read a map, don't worry about it."
"Do you want me to come with you?"
I tried to be crafty as I hid my horror.
"That's all right, Dad, I'll probably just be in dressing rooms all day — very boring."
"Oh, okay." The thought of sitting in women's clothing stores for any period of time immediately put him
off.
"Thanks." I smiled at him.

I was confused. "I'm going home."
"Didn't you hear me promise to take you safely home? Do you think I'm going to let you drive in your
condition?" His voice was still indignant.
"What condition? And what about my truck?" I complained.
"I'll have Alice drop it off after school." He was towing me toward his car now, pulling me by my jacket.
It was all I could do to keep from falling backward. He'd probably just drag me along anyway if I did.
"Let go!" I insisted. He ignored me. I staggered along sideways across the wet sidewalk until we reached
the Volvo. Then he finally freed me — I stumbled against the passenger door.
"You are so pushy!" I grumbled.
"It's open," was all he responded. He got in the driver's side.
"I am perfectly capable of driving myself home!" I stood by the car, fuming. It was raining harder now,
and I'd never put my hood up, so my hair was dripping down my back.
He lowered the automatic window and leaned toward me across the seat. "Get in, Bella."
I didn't answer. I was mentally calculating my chances of reaching the truck before he could catch me. I
had to admit, they weren't good.
"I'll just drag you back," he threatened, guessing my plan.
I tried to maintain what dignity I could as I got into his car. I wasn't very successful — I looked like a
half-drowned cat and my boots squeaked.
"This is completely unnecessary," I said stiffly.
He didn't answer. He fiddled with the controls, turning the heater up and the music down. As he pulled
out of the parking lot, I was preparing to give him the silent treatment — my face in full pout mode — but
then I recognized the music playing, and my curiosity got the better of my intentions.
"Clair de Lune?" I asked, surprised.
"You know Debussy?" He sounded surprised, too.
"Not well," I admitted. "My mother plays a lot of classical music around the house — I only know my
favorites."
"It's one of my favorites, too." He stared out through the rain, lost in thought.
I listened to the music, relaxing against the light gray leather seat. It was impossible not to respond to the
familiar, soothing melody. The rain blurred everything outside the window into gray and green smudges. I
began to realize we were driving very fast; the car moved so steadily, so evenly, though, I didn't feel the
speed. Only the town flashing by gave it away.
"What is your mother like?" he asked me suddenly.
I glanced over to see him studying me with curious eyes.
"She looks a lot like me, but she's prettier," I said. He raised his eyebrows. "I have too much Charlie in

me. She's more outgoing than I am, and braver. She's irresponsible and slightly eccentric, and she's a
very unpredictable cook. She's my best friend." I stopped. Talking about her was making me depressed.
"How old are you, Bella?" His voice sounded frustrated for some reason I couldn't imagine. He'd
stopped the car, and I realized we were at Charlie's house already. The rain was so heavy that I could
barely see the house at all. It was like the car was submerged under a river.
"I'm seventeen," I responded, a little confused.
"You don't seem seventeen."
His tone was reproachful; it made me laugh.
"What?" he asked, curious again.
"My mom always says I was born thirty-five years old and that I get more middle-aged every year." I
laughed, and then sighed. "Well, someone has to be the adult." I paused for a second. "You don't seem
much like a junior in high school yourself," I noted.
He made a face and changed the subject.
"So why did your mother marry Phil?"
I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took
me a moment to answer.
"My mother… she's very young for her age. I think Phil makes her feel even younger. At any rate, she's
crazy about him." I shook my head. The attraction was a mystery to me.
"Do you approve?" he asked.
"Does it matter?" I countered. "I want her to be happy… and he is who she wants."
"That's very generous… I wonder," he mused.
"What?"
"Would she extend the same courtesy to you, do you think? No matter who your choice was?" He was
suddenly intent, his eyes searching mine.
"I-I think so," I stuttered. "But she's the parent, after all. It's a little bit different."
"No one too scary then," he teased.
I grinned in response. "What do you mean by scary? Multiple facial piercings and extensive tattoos?"
"That's one definition, I suppose."
"What's your definition?"
But he ignored my question and asked me another. "Do you think that I could be scary?" He raised one
eyebrow, and the faint trace of a smile lightened his face.
I thought for a moment, wondering whether the truth or a lie would go over better. I decided to go with
the truth. "Hmmm… I think you could be, if you wanted to."

"Are you frightened of me now?" The smile vanished, and his heavenly face was suddenly serious.
"No." But I answered too quickly. The smile returned.
"So, now are you going to tell me about your family?" I asked to distract him. "It's got to be a much more
interesting story than mine."
He was instantly cautious. "What do you want to know?"
"The Cullens adopted you?" I verified.
"Yes."
I hesitated for a moment. "What happened to your parents?"
"They died many years ago." His tone was matter-of-fact.
"I'm sorry," I mumbled.
"I don't really remember them that clearly. Carlisle and Esme have been my parents for a long time now."
"And you love them." It wasn't a question. It was obvious in the way he spoke of them.
"Yes." He smiled. "I couldn't imagine two better people."
"You're very lucky."
"I know I am."
"And your brother and sister?"
He glanced at the clock on the dashboard.
"My brother and sister, and Jasper and Rosalie for that matter, are going to be quite upset if they have to
stand in the rain waiting for me."
"Oh, sorry, I guess you have to go." I didn't want to get out of the car.
"And you probably want your truck back before Chief Swan gets home, so you don't have to tell him
about the Biology incident." He grinned at me.
"I'm sure he's already heard. There are no secrets in Forks." I sighed.
He laughed, and there was an edge to his laughter.
"Have fun at the beach… good weather for sunbathing." He glanced out at the sheeting rain.
"Won't I see you tomorrow?"
"No. Emmett and I are starting the weekend early."
"What are you going to do?" A friend could ask that, right? I hoped the disappointment wasn't too
apparent in my voice.
"We're going to be hiking in the Goat Rocks Wilderness, just south of Rainier."
I remembered Charlie had said the Cullens went camping frequently.

That night at dinner, Charlie seemed enthusiastic about my trip to La Push in the morning. I think he felt
guilty for leaving me home alone on the weekends, but he'd spent too many years building his habits to
break them now. Of course he knew the names of all the kids going, and their parents, and their
great-grandparents, too, probably. He seemed to approve. I wondered if he would approve of my plan
to ride to Seattle with Edward Cullen. Not that I was going to tell him.
"Dad, do you know a place called Goat Rocks or something like that? I think it's south of Mount
Rainier," I asked casually.
"Yeah — why?"
I shrugged. "Some kids were talking about camping there."
"It's not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there
during the hunting season."
"Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the name wrong."
I meant to sleep in, but an unusual brightness woke me. I opened my eyes to see a clear yellow light
streaming through my window. I couldn't believe it. I hurried to the window to check, and sure enough,
there was the sun. It was in the wrong place in the sky, too low, and it didn't seem to be as close as it
should be, but it was definitely the sun. Clouds ringed the horizon, but a large patch of blue was visible in
the middle. I lingered by the window as long as I could, afraid that if I left the blue would disappear
again.
The Newtons' Olympic Outfitters store was just north of town. I'd seen the store, but I'd never stopped
there — not having much need for any supplies required for being outdoors over an extended period of
time. In the parking lot I recognized Mike's Suburban and Tyler's Sentra. As I pulled up next to their
vehicles, I could see the group standing around in front of the Suburban. Eric was there, along with two
other boys I had class with; I was fairly sure their names were Ben and Conner. Jess was there, flanked
by Angela and Lauren. Three other girls stood with them, including one I remembered falling over in Gym
on Friday. That one gave me a dirty look as I got out of the truck, and whispered something to Lauren.
Lauren shook out her cornsilk hair and eyed me scornfully.
So it was going to be one of those days.
At least Mike was happy to see me.
"You came!" he called, delighted. "And I said it would be sunny today, didn't I?"
"I told you I was coming," I reminded him.

"We're just waiting for Lee and Samantha… unless you invited someone," Mike added.
"Nope," I lied lightly, hoping I wouldn't get caught in the lie. But also wishing that a miracle would occur,
and Edward would appear.
Mike looked satisfied.
"Will you ride in my car? It's that or Lee's mom's minivan."
"Sure."
He smiled blissfully. It was so easy to make Mike happy.
"You can have shotgun," he promised. I hid my chagrin. It wasn't as simple to make Mike and Jessica
happy at the same time. I could see Jessica glowering at us now.
The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat
was necessary. I managed to wedge Jess in between Mike and me in the front seat of the Suburban.
Mike could have been more graceful about it, but at least Jess seemed appeased.
It was only fifteen miles to La Push from Forks, with gorgeous, dense green forests edging the road most
of the way and the wide Quillayute River snaking beneath it twice. I was glad I had the window seat.
We'd rolled the windows down — the Suburban was a bit claustrophobic with nine people in it — and I
tried to absorb as much sunlight as possible.
I'd been to the beaches around La Push many times during my Forks summers with Charlie, so the
mile-long crescent of First Beach was familiar to me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray,
even in the sunlight, white-capped and heaving to the gray, rocky shore. Islands rose out of the steel
harbor waters with sheer cliff sides, reaching to uneven summits, and crowned with austere, soaring firs.
The beach had only a thin border of actual sand at the water's edge, after which it grew into millions of
large, smooth stones that looked uniformly gray from a distance, but close up were every shade a stone
could be: terra-cotta, sea green, lavender, blue gray, dull gold. The tide line was strewn with huge
driftwood trees, bleached bone white in the salt waves, some piled together against the edge of the forest
fringe, some lying solitary, just out of reach of the waves.
There was a brisk wind coming off the waves, cool and briny. Pelicans floated on the swells while
seagulls and a lone eagle wheeled above them. The clouds still circled the sky, threatening to invade at
any moment, but for now the sun shone bravely in its halo of blue sky.
We picked our way down to the beach, Mike leading the way to a ring of driftwood logs that had
obviously been used for parties like ours before. There was a fire circle already in place, filled with black
ashes. Eric and the boy I thought was named Ben gathered broken branches of driftwood from the drier
piles against the forest edge, and soon had a teepee-shaped construction built atop the old cinders.
"Have you ever seen a driftwood fire?" Mike asked me. I was sitting on one of the bone-colored
benches; the other girls clustered, gossiping excitedly, on either side of me. Mike kneeled by the fire,
lighting one of the smaller sticks with a cigarette lighter.
"No," I said as he placed the blazing twig carefully against the teepee.
"You'll like this then — watch the colors." He lit another small branch and laid it alongside the first. The
flames started to lick quickly up the dry wood.
"It's blue," I said in surprise.

During lunch the clouds started to advance, slinking across the blue sky, darting in front of the sun
momentarily, casting long shadows across the beach, and blackening the waves. As they finished eating,
people started to drift away in twos and threes. Some walked down to the edge of the waves, trying to
skip rocks across the choppy surface. Others were gathering a second expedition to the tide pools. Mike
— with Jessica shadowing him — headed up to the one shop in the village. Some of the local kids went
with them; others went along on the hike. By the time they all had scattered, I was sitting alone on my
driftwood log, with Lauren and Tyler occupying themselves by the CD player someone had thought to
bring, and three teenagers from the reservation perched around the circle, including the boy named Jacob
and the oldest boy who had acted as spokesperson.
A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her place by my side. He
looked fourteen, maybe fifteen, and had long, glossy black hair pulled back with a rubber band at the
nape of his neck. His skin was beautiful, silky and russet-colored; his eyes were dark, set deep above the
high planes of his cheekbones. He still had just a hint of childish roundness left around his chin.
Altogether, a very pretty face. However, my positive opinion of his looks was damaged by the first
words out of his mouth.
"You're Isabella Swan, aren't you?"
It was like the first day of school all over again.
"Bella," I sighed.
"I'm Jacob Black." He held his hand out in a friendly gesture. "You bought my dad's truck."
"Oh," I said, relieved, shaking his sleek hand. "You're Billy's son. I probably should remember you."
"No, I'm the youngest of the family — you would remember my older sisters."
"Rachel and Rebecca," I suddenly recalled. Charlie and Billy had thrown us together a lot during my
visits, to keep us busy while they fished. We were all too shy to make much progress as friends. Of
course, I'd kicked up enough tantrums to end the fishing trips by the time I was eleven.
"Are they here?" I examined the girls at the ocean's edge, wondering if I would recognize them now.
"No." Jacob shook his head. "Rachel got a scholarship to Washington State, and Rebecca married a
Samoan surfer — she lives in Hawaii now."
"Married. Wow." I was stunned. The twins were only a little over a year older than I was.
"So how do you like the truck?" he asked.
"I love it. It runs great."
"Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so relived when Charlie bought it. My dad wouldn't let me
work on building another car when we had a perfectly good vehicle right there."
"It's not that slow," I objected.
"Have you tried to go over sixty?"
"No," I admitted.
"Good. Don't." He grinned.

"You have goose bumps," he laughed delightedly.
"You're a good storyteller," I complimented him, still staring into the waves.
"Pretty crazy stuff, though, isn't it? No wonder my dad doesn't want us to talk about it to anyone."
I couldn't control my expression enough to look at him yet. "Don't worry, I won't give you away."
"I guess I just violated the treaty," he laughed.
"I'll take it to the grave," I promised, and then I shivered.
"Seriously, though, don't say anything to Charlie. He was pretty mad at my dad when he heard that some
of us weren't going to the hospital since Dr. Cullen started working there."
"I won't, of course not."
"So do you think we're a bunch of superstitious natives or what?" he asked in a playful tone, but with a
hint of worry. I still hadn't looked away from the ocean.
I turned and smiled at him as normally as I could.
"No. I think you're very good at telling scary stories, though. I still have goose bumps, see?" I held up my
arm.
"Cool." He smiled.
And then the sound of the beach rocks clattering against each other warned us that someone was
approaching. Our heads snapped up at the same time to see Mike and Jessica about fifty yards away,
walking toward us.
"There you are, Bella," Mike called in relief, waving his arm over his head.
"Is that your boyfriend?" Jacob asked, alerted by the jealous edge in Mike's voice. I was surprised it was
so obvious.
"No, definitely not," I whispered. I was tremendously grateful to Jacob, and eager to make him as happy
as possible. I winked at him, carefully turning away from Mike to do so. He smiled, elated by my inept
flirting.
"So when I get my license…" he began.
"You should come see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said this, knowing
that I'd used him. But I really did like Jacob. He was someone I could easily be friends with.
Mike had reached us now, with Jessica still a few paces back. I could see his eyes appraising Jacob, and
looking satisfied at his obvious youth.
"Where have you been?" he asked, though the answer was right in front of him.
"Jacob was just telling me some local stories," I volunteered. "It was really interesting."
I smiled at Jacob warmly, and he grinned back.
"Well," Mike paused, carefully reassessing the situation as he watched our camaraderie. "We're packing
up — it looks like it's going to rain soon."

We all looked up at the glowering sky. It certainly did look like rain.
"Okay." I jumped up. "I'm coming."
"It was nice to see you again," Jacob said, and I could tell he was taunting Mike just a bit.
"It really was. Next time Charlie comes down to see Billy, I'll come, too," I promised.
His grin stretched across his face. "That would be cool."
"And thanks," I added earnestly.
I pulled up my hood as we tramped across the rocks toward the parking lot. A few drops were
beginning to fall, making black spots on the stones where they landed. When we got to the Suburban the
others were already loading everything back in. I crawled into the backseat by Angela and Tyler,
announcing that I'd already had my turn in the shotgun position. Angela just stared out the window at the
escalating storm, and Lauren twisted around in the middle seat to occupy Tyler's attention, so I could
simply lay my head back on the seat and close my eyes and try very hard not to think.

I told Charlie I had a lot of homework to do, and that I didn't want anything to eat. There was a
basketball game on that he was excited about, though of course I had no idea what was special about it,
so he wasn't aware of anything unusual in my face or tone.
Once in my room, I locked the door. I dug through my desk until I found my old headphones, and I
plugged them into my little CD player. I picked up a CD that Phil had given to me for Christmas. It was
one of his favorite bands, but they used a little too much bass and shrieking for my tastes. I popped it into
place and lay down on my bed. I put on the headphones, hit Play, and turned up the volume until it hurt
my ears. I closed my eyes, but the light still intruded, so I added a pillow over the top half of my face.
I concentrated very carefully on the music, trying to understand the lyrics, to unravel the complicated
drum patterns. By the third time I'd listened through the CD, I knew all the words to the choruses, at
least. I was surprised to find that I really did like the band after all, once I got past the blaring noise. I'd
have to thank Phil again.
And it worked. The shattering beats made it impossible for me to think — which was the whole purpose
of the exercise. I listened to the CD again and again, until I was singing along with all the songs, until,
finally, I fell asleep.
I opened my eyes to a familiar place. Aware in some corner of my consciousness that I was dreaming, I
recognized the green light of the forest. I could hear the waves crashing against the rocks somewhere
nearby. And I knew that if I found the ocean, I'd be able to see the sun. I was trying to follow the sound,
but then Jacob Black was there, tugging on my hand, pulling me back toward the blackest part of the
forest.
"Jacob? What's wrong?" I asked. His face was frightened as he yanked with all his strength against my
resistance; I didn't want to go into the dark.
"Run, Bella, you have to run!" he whispered, terrified.

"This way, Bella!" I recognized Mike's voice calling out of the gloomy heart of the trees, but I couldn't
see him.
"Why?" I asked, still pulling against Jacob's grasp, desperate now to find the sun.
But Jacob let go of my hand and yelped, suddenly shaking, falling to the dim forest floor. He twitched on
the ground as I watched in horror.
"Jacob!" I screamed. But he was gone. In his place was a large red-brown wolf with black eyes. The
wolf faced away from me, pointing toward the shore, the hair on the back of his shoulders bristling, low
growls issuing from between his exposed fangs.
"Bella, run!" Mike cried out again from behind me. But I didn't turn. I was watching a light coming toward
me from the beach.
And then Edward stepped out from the trees, his skin faintly glowing, his eyes black and dangerous. He
held up one hand and beckoned me to come to him. The wolf growled at my feet.
I took a step forward, toward Edward. He smiled then, and his teeth were sharp, pointed.
"Trust me," he purred.
I took another step.
The wolf launched himself across the space between me and the vampire, fangs aiming for the jugular.
"No!" I screamed, wrenching upright out of my bed.
My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player off the bedside table, and it clattered
to the wooden floor.
My light was still on, and I was sitting fully dressed on the bed, with my shoes on. I glanced, disoriented,
at the clock on my dresser. It was five-thirty in the morning.
I groaned, fell back, and rolled over onto my face, kicking off my boots. I was too uncomfortable to get
anywhere near sleep, though. I rolled back over and unbuttoned my jeans, yanking them off awkwardly
as I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of my
skull. I turned onto my side and ripped the rubber band out, quickly combing through the plaits with my
fingers. I pulled the pillow back over my eyes.
It was all no use, of course. My subconscious had dredged up exactly the images I'd been trying so
desperately to avoid. I was going to have to face them now.
I sat up, and my head spun for a minute as the blood flowed downward. First things first, I thought to
myself, happy to put it off as long as possible. I grabbed my bathroom bag.
The shower didn't last nearly as long as I hoped it would, though. Even taking the time to blow-dry my
hair, I was soon out of things to do in the bathroom. Wrapped in a towel, I crossed back to my room. I
couldn't tell if Charlie was still asleep, or if he had already left. I went to look out my window, and the
cruiser was gone. Fishing again.
I dressed slowly in my most comfy sweats and then made my bed — something I never did. I couldn't
put it off any longer. I went to my desk and switched on my old computer.
I hated using the Internet here. My modem was sadly outdated, my free service substandard; just dialing

could massacre an entire village in the single hour after midnight, and one other, the Stregoni benefici.
About this last there was only one brief sentence.
Stregoni benefici: An Italian vampire, said to be on the side of goodness, and a mortal enemy of
all evil vampires.
It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of good
vampires.
Overall, though, there was little that coincided with Jacob's stories or my own observations. I'd made a
little catalogue in my mind as I'd read and carefully compared it with each myth. Speed, strength, beauty,
pale skin, eyes that shift color; and then Jacob's criteria: blood drinkers, enemies of the werewolf,
cold-skinned, and immortal. There were very few myths that matched even one factor.
And then another problem, one that I'd remembered from the small number of scary movies that I'd seen
and was backed up by today's reading — vampires couldn't come out in the daytime, the sun would burn
them to a cinder. They slept in coffins all day and came out only at night.
Aggravated, I snapped off the computer's main power switch, not waiting to shut things down properly.
Through my irritation, I felt overwhelming embarrassment. It was all so stupid. I was sitting in my room,
researching vampires. What was wrong with me? I decided that most of the blame belonged on the
doorstep of the town of Forks — and the entire sodden Olympic Peninsula, for that matter.
I had to get out of the house, but there was nowhere I wanted to go that didn't involve a three-day drive.
I pulled on my boots anyway, unclear where I was headed, and went downstairs. I shrugged into my
raincoat without checking the weather and stomped out the door.
It was overcast, but not raining yet. I ignored my truck and started east on foot, angling across Charlie's
yard toward the ever-encroaching forest. It didn't take long till I was deep enough for the house and the
road to be invisible, for the only sound to be the squish of the damp earth under my feet and the sudden
cries of the jays.
There was a thin ribbon of a trail that led through the forest here, or I wouldn't risk wandering on my own
like this. My sense of direction was hopeless; I could get lost in much less helpful surroundings. The trail
wound deeper and deeper into the forest, mostly east as far as I could tell. It snaked around the Sitka
spruces and the hemlocks, the yews and the maples. I only vaguely knew the names of the trees around
me, and all I knew was due to Charlie pointing them out to me from the cruiser window in earlier days.
There were many I didn't know, and others I couldn't be sure about because they were so covered in
green parasites.
I followed the trail as long as my anger at myself pushed me forward. As that started to ebb, I slowed. A
few drops of moisture trickled down from the canopy above me, but I couldn't be certain if it was
beginning to rain or if it was simply pools left over from yesterday, held high in the leaves above me,
slowly dripping their way back to the earth. A recently fallen tree — I knew it was recent because it
wasn't entirely carpeted in moss — rested against the trunk of one of her sisters, creating a sheltered little
bench just a few safe feet off the trail. I stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket
was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back
against the living tree.
This was the wrong place to have come. I should have known, but where else was there to go? The
forest was deep green and far too much like the scene in last night's dream to allow for peace of mind.
Now that there was no longer the sound of my soggy footsteps, the silence was piercing. The birds were

my lips. It was fear that he would be harmed — even as he called to me with sharp-edged fangs, I feared
for him.
And I knew in that I had my answer. I didn't know if there ever was a choice, really. I was already in too
deep. Now that I knew — if I knew — I could do nothing about my frightening secret. Because when I
thought of him, of his voice, his hypnotic eyes, the magnetic force of his personality, I wanted nothing
more than to be with him right now. Even if… but I couldn't think it. Not here, alone in the darkening
forest. Not while the rain made it dim as twilight under the canopy and pattered like footsteps across the
matted earthen floor. I shivered and rose quickly from my place of concealment, worried that somehow
the path would have disappeared with the rain.
But it was there, safe and clear, winding its way out of the dripping green maze. I followed it hastily, my
hood pulled close around my face, becoming surprised, as I nearly ran through the trees, at how far I had
come. I started to wonder if I was heading out at all, or following the path farther into the confines of the
forest. Before I could get too panicky, though, I began to glimpse some open spaces through the webbed
branches. And then I could hear a car passing on the street, and I was free, Charlie's lawn stretched out
in front of me, the house beckoning me, promising warmth and dry socks.
It was just noon when I got back inside. I went upstairs and got dressed for the day, jeans and a t-shirt,
since I was staying indoors. It didn't take too much effort to concentrate on my task for the day, a paper
on Macbeth that was due Wednesday. I settled into outlining a rough draft contentedly, more serene than
I'd felt since… well, since Thursday afternoon, if I was being honest.
That had always been my way, though. Making decisions was the painful part for me, the part I agonized
over. But once the decision was made, I simply followed through — usually with relief that the choice
was made. Sometimes the relief was tainted by despair, like my decision to come to Forks. But it was
still better than wrestling with the alternatives.
This decision was ridiculously easy to live with. Dangerously easy.
And so the day was quiet, productive — I finished my paper before eight. Charlie came home with a
large catch, and I made a mental note to pick up a book of recipes for fish while I was in Seattle next
week. The chills that flashed up my spine whenever I thought of that trip were no different than the ones
I'd felt before I'd taken my walk with Jacob Black. They should be different, I thought. I should be afraid
— I knew I should be, but I couldn't feel the right kind of fear.
I slept dreamlessly that night, exhausted from beginning my day so early, and sleeping so poorly the night
before. I woke, for the second time since arriving in Forks, to the bright yellow light of a sunny day. I
skipped to the window, stunned to see that there was hardly a cloud in the sky, and those there were just
fleecy little white puffs that couldn't possibly be carrying any rain. I opened the window — surprised
when it opened silently, without sticking, not having opened it in who knows how many years — and
sucked in the relatively dry air. It was nearly warm and hardly windy at all. My blood was electric in my
veins.
Charlie was finishing breakfast when I came downstairs, and he picked up on my mood immediately.
"Nice day out," he commented.
"Yes," I agreed with a grin.
He smiled back, his brown eyes crinkling around the edges. When Charlie smiled, it was easier to see
why he and my mother had jumped too quickly into an early marriage. Most of the young romantic he'd
been in those days had faded before I'd known him, as the curly brown hair — the same color, if not the

same texture, as mine — had dwindled, slowly revealing more and more of the shiny skin of his forehead.
But when he smiled I could see a little of the man who had run away with Renée when she was just two
years older than I was now.
I ate breakfast cheerily, watching the dust moats stirring in the sunlight that streamed in the back window.
Charlie called out a goodbye, and I heard the cruiser pull away from the house. I hesitated on my way
out the door, hand on my rain jacket. It would be tempting fate to leave it home. With a sigh, I folded it
over my arm and stepped out into the brightest light I'd seen in months.
By dint of much elbow grease, I was able to get both windows in the truck almost completely rolled
down. I was one of the first ones to school; I hadn't even checked the clock in my hurry to get outside. I
parked and headed toward the seldom-used picnic benches on the south side of the cafeteria. The
benches were still a little damp, so I sat on my jacket, glad to have a use for it. My homework was done
— the product of a slow social life — but there were a few Trig problems I wasn't sure I had right. I
took out my book industriously, but halfway through rechecking the first problem I was daydreaming,
watching the sunlight play on the red-barked trees. I sketched inattentively along the margins of my
homework. After a few minutes, I suddenly realized I'd drawn five pairs of dark eyes staring out of the
page at me. I scrubbed them out with the eraser.
"Bella!" I heard someone call, and it sounded like Mike.
I looked around to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting there,
absentminded. Everyone was in t-shirts, some even in shorts though the temperature couldn't be over
sixty. Mike was coming toward me in khaki shorts and a striped Rugby shirt, waving.
"Hey, Mike," I called, waving back, unable to be halfhearted on a morning like this.
He came to sit by me, the tidy spikes of his hair shining golden in the light, his grin stretching across his
face. He was so delighted to see me, I couldn't help but feel gratified.
"I never noticed before — your hair has red in it," he commented, catching between his fingers a strand
that was fluttering in the light breeze.
"Only in the sun."
I became just a little uncomfortable as he tucked the lock behind my ear.
"Great day, isn't it?"
"My kind of day," I agreed.
"What did you do yesterday?" His tone was just a bit too proprietary.
"I mostly worked on my essay." I didn't add that I was finished with it — no need to sound smug.
He hit his forehead with the heel of his hand. "Oh yeah — that's due Thursday, right?"
"Um, Wednesday, I think."
"Wednesday?" He frowned. "That's not good… What are you writing yours on?"
"Whether Shakespeare's treatment of the female characters is misogynistic."
He stared at me like I'd just spoken in pig Latin.

"I guess I'll have to get to work on that tonight," he said, deflated. "I was going to ask if you wanted to go
out."
"Oh." I was taken off guard. Why couldn't I ever have a pleasant conversation with Mike anymore
without it getting awkward?
"Well, we could go to dinner or something… and I could work on it later." He smiled at me hopefully.
"Mike…" I hated being put on the spot. "I don't think that would be the best idea."
His face fell. "Why?" he asked, his eyes guarded. My thoughts flickered to Edward, wondering if that's
where his thoughts were as well.
"I think… and if you ever repeat what I'm saying right now I will cheerfully beat you to death," I
threatened, "but I think that would hurt Jessica's feelings."
He was bewildered, obviously not thinking in that direction at all. "Jessica?"
"Really, Mike, are you blind?"
"Oh," he exhaled — clearly dazed. I took advantage of that to make my escape.
"It's time for class, and I can't be late again." I gathered my books up and stuffed them in my bag.
We walked in silence to building three, and his expression was distracted. I hoped whatever thoughts he
was immersed in were leading him in the right direction.
When I saw Jessica in Trig, she was bubbling with enthusiasm. She, Angela, and Lauren were going to
Port Angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the dance, and she wanted me to come, too, even though I
didn't need one. I was indecisive. It would be nice to get out of town with some girlfriends, but Lauren
would be there. And who knew what I could be doing tonight… But that was definitely the wrong path
to let my mind wander down. Of course I was happy about the sunlight. But that wasn't completely
responsible for the euphoric mood I was in, not even close.
So I gave her a maybe, telling her I'd have to talk with Charlie first.
She talked of nothing but the dance on the way to Spanish, continuing as if without an interruption when
class finally ended, five minutes late, and we were on our way to lunch. I was far too lost in my own
frenzy of anticipation to notice much of what she said. I was painfully eager to see not just him but all the
Cullens — to compare them with the new suspicions that plagued my mind. As I crossed the threshold of
the cafeteria, I felt the first true tingle of fear slither down my spine and settle in my stomach. Would they
be able to know what I was thinking? And then a different feeling jolted through me — would Edward be
waiting to sit with me again?
As was my routine, I glanced first toward the Cullens' table. A shiver of panic trembled in my stomach as
I realized it was empty. With dwindling hope, my eyes scoured the rest of the cafeteria, hoping to find
him alone, waiting for me. The place was nearly filled — Spanish had made us late — but there was no
sign of Edward or any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength.
I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore.
We were late enough that everyone was already at our table. I avoided the empty chair next to Mike in
favor of one by Angela. I vaguely noticed that Mike held the chair out politely for Jessica, and that her
face lit up in response.

Angela asked a few quiet questions about the Macbeth paper, which I answered as naturally as I could
while spiraling downward in misery. She, too, invited me to go with them tonight, and I agreed now,
grasping at anything to distract myself.
I realized I'd been holding on to a last shred of hope when I entered Biology, saw his empty seat, and felt
a new wave of disappointment.
The rest of the day passed slowly, dismally. In Gym, we had a lecture on the rules of badminton, the next
torture they had lined up for me. But at least it meant I got to sit and listen instead of stumbling around on
the court. The best part was the coach didn't finish, so I got another day off tomorrow. Never mind that
the day after they would arm me with a racket before unleashing me on the rest of the class.
I was glad to leave campus, so I would be free to pout and mope before I went out tonight with Jessica
and company. But right after I walked in the door of Charlie's house, Jessica called to cancel our plans. I
tried to be happy that Mike had asked her out to dinner — I really was relieved that he finally seemed to
be catching on — but my enthusiasm sounded false in my own ears. She rescheduled our shopping trip
for tomorrow night.
Which left me with little in the way of distractions. I had fish marinating for dinner, with a salad and bread
left over from the night before, so there was nothing to do there. I spent a focused half hour on
homework, but then I was through with that, too. I checked my e-mail, reading the backlog of letters
from my mother, getting snippier as they progressed to the present. I sighed and typed a quick response.

I decided to kill an hour with non-school-related reading. I had a small collection of books that came
with me to Forks, the shabbiest volume being a compilation of the works of Jane Austen. I selected that
one and headed to the backyard, grabbing a ragged old quilt from the linen cupboard at the top of the
stairs on my way down.
Outside in Charlie's small, square yard, I folded the quilt in half and laid it out of the reach of the trees'
shadows on the thick lawn that would always be slightly wet, no matter how long the sun shone. I lay on
my stomach, crossing my ankles in the air, flipping through the different novels in the book, trying to
decide which would occupy my mind the most thoroughly. My favorites were Pride and Prejudice and
Sense and Sensibility. I'd read the first most recently, so I started into Sense and Sensibility, only to
remember after I began three that the hero of the story happened to be named Edward. Angrily, I turned
to Mansfield Park, but the hero of that piece was named Edmund, and that was just too close. Weren't

there any other names available in the late eighteenth century? I snapped the book shut, annoyed, and
rolled over onto my back. I pushed my sleeves up as high as they would go, and closed my eyes. I would
think of nothing but the warmth on my skin, I told myself severely. The breeze was still light, but it blew
tendrils of my hair around my face, and that tickled a bit. I pulled all my hair over my head, letting it fan
out on the quilt above me, and focused again on the heat that touched my eyelids, my cheekbones, my
nose, my lips, my forearms, my neck, soaked through my light shirt…
The next thing I was conscious of was the sound of Charlie's cruiser turning onto the bricks of the
driveway. I sat up in surprise, realizing the light was gone, behind the trees, and I had fallen asleep. I
looked around, muddled, with the sudden feeling that I wasn't alone.
"Charlie?" I asked. But I could hear his door slamming in front of the house.
I jumped up, foolishly edgy, gathering the now-damp quilt and my book. I ran inside to get some oil
heating on the stove, realizing that dinner would be late. Charlie was hanging up his gun belt and stepping
out of his boots when I came in.
"Sorry, Dad, dinner's not ready yet — I fell asleep outside." I stifled a yawn.
"Don't worry about it," he said. "I wanted to catch the score on the game, anyway."
I watched TV with Charlie after dinner, for something to do. There wasn't anything on I wanted to watch,
but he knew I didn't like baseball, so he turned it to some mindless sitcom that neither of us enjoyed. He
seemed happy, though, to be doing something together. And it felt good, despite my depression, to make
him happy.
"Dad," I said during a commercial, "Jessica and Angela are going to look at dresses for the dance
tomorrow night in Port Angeles, and they wanted me to help them choose… do you mind if I go with
them?"
"Jessica Stanley?" he asked.
"And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him the details.
He was confused. "But you're not going to the dance, right?"
"No, Dad, but I'm helping them find dresses — you know, giving them constructive criticism." I wouldn't
have to explain this to a woman.
"Well, okay." He seemed to realize that he was out of his depth with the girlie stuff. "It's a school night,
though."
"We'll leave right after school, so we can get back early. You'll be okay for dinner, right?"
"Bells, I fed myself for seventeen years before you got here," he reminded me.
"I don't know how you survived," I muttered, then added more clearly, "I'll leave some things for cold-cut
sandwiches in the fridge, okay? Right on top."
It was sunny again in the morning. I awakened with renewed hope that I grimly tried to suppress. I
dressed for the warmer weather in a deep blue V-neck blouse — something I'd worn in the dead of
winter in Phoenix.
I had planned my arrival at school so that I barely had time to make it to class. With a sinking heart, I

circled the full lot looking for a space, while also searching for the silver Volvo that was clearly not there.
I parked in the last row and hurried to English, arriving breathless, but subdued, before the final bell.
It was the same as yesterday — I just couldn't keep little sprouts of hope from budding in my mind, only
to have them squashed painfully as I searched the lunchroom in vain and sat at my empty Biology table.
The Port Angeles scheme was back on again for tonight and made all the more attractive by the fact that
Lauren had other obligations. I was anxious to get out of town so I could stop glancing over my shoulder,
hoping to see him appearing out of the blue the way he always did. I vowed to myself that I would be in a
good mood tonight and not ruin Angela's or Jessica's enjoyment in the dress hunting. Maybe I could do a
little clothes shopping as well. I refused to think that I might be shopping alone in Seattle this weekend,
no longer interested in the earlier arrangement. Surely he wouldn't cancel without at least telling me.
After school, Jessica followed me home in her old white Mercury so that I could ditch my books and
truck. I brushed through my hair quickly when I was inside, feeling a slight lift of excitement as I
contemplated getting out of Forks. I left a note for Charlie on the table, explaining again where to find
dinner, switched my scruffy wallet from my school bag to a purse I rarely used, and ran out to join
Jessica. We went to Angela's house next, and she was waiting for us. My excitement increased
exponentially as we actually drove out of the town limits.

"Holy crow!" I shouted. "Slow down!"
"What's wrong?" He was startled. But the car didn't decelerate.
"You're going a hundred miles an hour!" I was still shouting. I shot a panicky glance out the window, but
it was too dark to see much. The road was only visible in the long patch of bluish brightness from the
headlights. The forest along both sides of the road was like a black wall — as hard as a wall of steel if
we veered off the road at this speed.
"Relax, Bella." He rolled his eyes, still not slowing.
"Are you trying to kill us?" I demanded.
"We're not going to crash."
I tried to modulate my voice. "Why are you in such a hurry?"
"I always drive like this." He turned to smile crookedly at me.
"Keep your eyes on the road!"
"I've never been in an accident, Bella — I've never even gotten a ticket." He grinned and tapped his
forehead. "Built-in radar detector."
"Very funny." I fumed. "Charlie's a cop, remember? I was raised to abide by traffic laws. Besides, if you
turn us into a Volvo pretzel around a tree trunk, you can probably just walk away."
"Probably," he agreed with a short, hard laugh. "But you can't." He sighed, and I watched with relief as
the needle gradually drifted toward eighty. "Happy?"
"Almost."
"I hate driving slow," he muttered.
"This is slow?"
"Enough commentary on my driving," he snapped. "I'm still waiting for your latest theory."
I bit my lip. He looked down at me, his honey eyes unexpectedly gentle.
"I won't laugh," he promised.
"I'm more afraid that you'll be angry with me."
"Is it that bad?"
"Pretty much, yeah."
He waited. I was looking down at my hands, so I couldn't see his expression.
"Go ahead." His voice was calm.
"I don't know how to start," I admitted.
"Why don't you start at the beginning… you said you didn't come up with this on your own."

"No."
"What got you started — a book? A movie?" he probed.
"No — it was Saturday, at the beach." I risked a glance up at his face. He looked puzzled.
"I ran into an old family friend —Jacob Black," I continued. "His dad and Charlie have been friends since
I was a baby."
He still looked confused.
"His dad is one of the Quileute elders." I watched him carefully. His confused expression froze in place.
"We went for a walk —" I edited all my scheming out of the story "— and he was telling me some old
legends — trying to scare me, I think. He told me one…" I hesitated.
"Go on," he said.
"About vampires." I realized I was whispering. I couldn't look at his face now. But I saw his knuckles
tighten convulsively on the wheel.
"And you immediately thought of me?" Still calm.
"No. He… mentioned your family."
He was silent, staring at the road.
I was worried suddenly, worried about protecting Jacob.
"He just thought it was a silly superstition," I said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think anything of it." It
didn't seem like enough; I had to confess. "It was my fault, I forced him to tell me."
"Why?"
"Lauren said something about you — she was trying to provoke me. And an older boy from the tribe
said your family didn't come to the reservation, only it sounded like he meant something different. So I
got Jacob alone and I tricked it out of him," I admitted, hanging my head.
He startled me by laughing. I glared up at him. He was laughing, but his eyes were fierce, staring ahead.
"Tricked him how?" he asked.
"I tried to flirt — it worked better than I thought it would." Disbelief colored my tone as I remembered.
"I'd like to have seen that." He chuckled darkly. "And you accused me of dazzling people — poor Jacob
Black."
I blushed and looked out my window into the night.
"What did you do then?" he asked after a minute.
"I did some research on the Internet."
"And did that convince you?" His voice sounded barely interested. But his hands were clamped hard
onto the steering wheel.
"No. Nothing fit. Most of it was kind of silly. And then…" I stopped.

"I'm sorry." His voice burned with regret. I knew he wasn't just apologizing for the words that had upset
me.
The darkness slipped by us in silence.
"Tell me something," he asked after another minute, and I could hear him struggle to use a lighter tone.
"Yes?"
"What were you thinking tonight, just before I came around the corner? I couldn't understand your
expression — you didn't look that scared, you looked like you were concentrating very hard on
something."
"I was trying to remember how to incapacitate an attacker — you know, self-defense. I was going to
smash his nose into his brain." I thought of the dark-haired man with a surge of hate.
"You were going to fight them?" This upset him. "Didn't you think about running?"
"I fall down a lot when I run," I admitted.
"What about screaming for help?"
"I was getting to that part."
He shook his head. "You were right — I'm definitely fighting fate trying to keep you alive."
I sighed. We were slowing, passing into the boundaries of Forks. It had taken less than twenty minutes.
"Will I see you tomorrow?" I demanded.
"Yes — I have a paper due, too." He smiled. "I'll save you a seat at lunch."
It was silly, after everything we'd been through tonight, how that little promise sent flutters through my
stomach, and made me unable to speak.
We were in front of Charlie's house. The lights were on, my truck in its place, everything utterly normal. It
was like waking from a dream. He stopped the car, but I didn't move.
"Do you promise to be there tomorrow?"
"I promise."
I considered that for a moment, then nodded. I pulled his jacket off, taking one last whiff.
"You can keep it — you don't have a jacket for tomorrow," he reminded me.
I handed it back to him. "I don't want to have to explain to Charlie."
"Oh, right." He grinned.
I hesitated, my hand on the door handle, trying to prolong the moment.
"Bella?" he asked in a different tone — serious, but hesitant.
"Yes?" I turned back to him too eagerly.

"Will you promise me something?"
"Yes," I said, and instantly regretted my unconditional agreement. What if he asked me to stay away from
him? I couldn't keep that promise.
"Don't go into the woods alone."
I stared at him in blank confusion. "Why?"
He frowned, and his eyes were tight as he stared past me out the window.
"I'm not always the most dangerous thing out there. Let's leave it at that."
I shuddered slightly at the sudden bleakness in his voice, but I was relieved. This, at least, was an easy
promise to honor. "Whatever you say."
"I'll see you tomorrow," he sighed, and I knew he wanted me to leave now.
"Tomorrow, then." I opened the door unwillingly.
"Bella?" I turned and he was leaning toward me, his pale, glorious face just inches from mine. My heart
stopped beating.
"Sleep well," he said. His breath blew in my face, stunning me. It was the same exquisite scent that clung
to his jacket, but in a more concentrated form. I blinked, thoroughly dazed. He leaned away.
I was unable to move until my brain had somewhat unscrambled itself. Then I stepped out of the car
awkwardly, having to use the frame for support. I thought I heard him chuckle, but the sound was too
quiet for me to be certain.
He waited till I had stumbled to the front door, and then I heard his engine quietly rev. I turned to watch
the silver car disappear around the corner. I realized it was very cold.
I reached for the key mechanically, unlocked the door, and stepped inside.
Charlie called from the living room. "Bella?"
"Yeah, Dad, it's me." I walked in to see him. He was watching a baseball game.
"You're home early."
"Am I?" I was surprised.
"It's not even eight yet," he told me. "Did you girls have fun?"
"Yeah — it was lots of fun." My head was spinning as I tried to remember all the way back to the girls'
night out I had planned. "They both found dresses."
"Are you all right?"
"I'm just tired. I did a lot of walking."
"Well, maybe you should go lie down." He sounded concerned. I wondered what my face looked like.
"I'm just going to call Jessica first."

It was very hard, in the morning, to argue with the part of me that was sure last night was a dream. Logic
wasn't on my side, or common sense. I clung to the parts I couldn't have imagined — like his smell. I was
sure I could never have dreamed that up on my own.
It was foggy and dark outside my window, absolutely perfect. He had no reason not to be in school
today. I dressed in my heavy clothes, remembering I didn't have a jacket. Further proof that my memory
was real.
When I got downstairs, Charlie was gone again — I was running later than I'd realized. I swallowed a
granola bar in three bites, chased it down with milk straight from the carton, and then hurried out the
door. Hopefully the rain would hold off until I could find Jessica.
It was unusually foggy; the air was almost smoky with it. The mist was ice cold where it clung to the
exposed skin on my face and neck. I couldn't wait to get the heat going in my truck. It was such a thick
fog that I was a few feet down the driveway before I realized there was a car in it: a silver car. My heart
thudded, stuttered, and then picked up again in double time.
I didn't see where he came from, but suddenly he was there, pulling the door open for me.
"Do you want to ride with me today?" he asked, amused by my expression as he caught me by surprise
yet again. There was uncertainty in his voice. He was really giving me a choice — I was free to refuse,
and part of him hoped for that. It was a vain hope.
"Yes, thank you," I said, trying to keep my voice calm. As I stepped into the warm car, I noticed his tan
jacket was slung over the headrest of the passenger seat. The door closed behind me, and, sooner than
should be possible, he was sitting next to me, starting the car.
"I brought the jacket for you. I didn't want you to get sick or something." His voice was guarded. I
noticed that he wore no jacket himself, just a light gray knit V-neck shirt with long sleeves. Again, the
fabric clung to his perfectly muscled chest. It was a colossal tribute to his face that it kept my eyes away
from his body.
"I'm not quite that delicate," I said, but I pulled the jacket onto my lap, pushing my arms through the
too-long sleeves, curious to see if the scent could possibly be as good as I remembered. It was better.
"Aren't you?" he contradicted in a voice so low I wasn't sure if he meant for me to hear.
We drove through the fog-shrouded streets, always too fast, feeling awkward. I was, at least. Last night
all the walls were down… almost all. I didn't know if we were still being as candid today. It left me
tongue-tied. I waited for him to speak.
He turned to smirk at me. "What, no twenty questions today?"
"Do my questions bother you?" I asked, relieved.
"Not as much as your reactions do." He looked like he was joking, but I couldn't be sure.
I frowned. "Do I react badly?"
"No, that's the problem. You take everything so coolly — it's unnatural. It makes me wonder what you're
really thinking."
"I always tell you what I'm really thinking."

As long as the "we" part was in, I didn't care about anything else.
"I'm open to alternatives," I allowed. "But I do have a favor to ask."
He looked wary, as he always did when I asked an open-ended question. "What?"
"Can I drive?"
He frowned. "Why?"
"Well, mostly because when I told Charlie I was going to Seattle, he specifically asked if I was going
alone and, at the time, I was. If he asked again, I probably wouldn't lie, but I don't think he will ask
again, and leaving my truck at home would just bring up the subject unnecessarily. And also, because
your driving frightens me."
He rolled his eyes. "Of all the things about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He
shook his head in disgust, but then his eyes were serious again. "Won't you want to tell your father that
you're spending the day with me?" There was an undercurrent to his question that I didn't understand.
"With Charlie, less is always more." I was definite about that. "Where are we going, anyway?"
"The weather will be nice, so I'll be staying out of the public eye… and you can stay with me, if you'd like
to." Again, he was leaving the choice up to me.
"And you'll show me what you meant, about the sun?" I asked, excited by the idea of unraveling another
of the unknowns.
"Yes." He smiled, and then paused. "But if you don't want to be… alone with me, I'd still rather you
didn't go to Seattle by yourself. I shudder to think of the trouble you could find in a city that size."
I was miffed. "Phoenix is three times bigger than Seattle — just in population. In physical size —"
"But apparently," he interrupted me, "your number wasn't up in Phoenix. So I'd rather you stayed near
me." His eyes did that unfair smoldering thing again.
I couldn't argue, with the eyes or the motivation, and it was a moot point anyway. "As it happens, I don't
mind being alone with you."
"I know," he sighed, brooding. "You should tell Charlie, though."
"Why in the world would I do that?"
His eyes were suddenly fierce. "To give me some small incentive to bring you back."
I gulped. But, after a moment of thought, I was sure. "I think I'll take my chances."
He exhaled angrily, and looked away.
"Let's talk about something else," I suggested.
"What do you want to talk about?" he asked. He was still annoyed.
I glanced around us, making sure we were well out of anyone's hearing. As I cast my eyes around the
room, I caught the eyes of his sister, Alice, staring at me. The others were looking at Edward. I looked
away swiftly, back to him, and I. asked the first thing that came to mind.

"Why did you go to that Goat Rocks place last weekend… to hunt? Charlie said it wasn't a good place
to hike, because of bears."
He stared at me as if I was missing something very obvious.
"Bears?" I gasped, and he smirked. "You know, bears are not in season," I added sternly, to hide my
shock.
"If you read carefully, the laws only cover hunting with weapons," he informed me.
He watched my face with enjoyment as that slowly sank in.
"Bears?" I repeated with difficulty.
"Grizzly is Emmett's favorite." His voice was still offhand, but his eyes were scrutinizing my reaction. I
tried to pull myself together.
"Hmmm," I said, taking another bite of pizza as an excuse to look down. I chewed slowly, and then took
a long drink of Coke without looking up.
"So," I said after a moment, finally meeting his now-anxious gaze. "What's your favorite?"
He raised an eyebrow and the corners of his mouth turned down in disapproval. "Mountain lion."
"Ah," I said in a politely disinterested tone, looking for my soda again.
"Of course," he said, and his tone mirrored mine, "we have to be careful not to impact the environment
with injudicious hunting. We try to focus on areas with an overpopulation of predators — ranging as far
away as we need. There's always plenty of deer and elk here, and they'll do, but where's the fun in that?"
He smiled teasingly.
"Where indeed," I murmured around another bite of pizza.
"Early spring is Emmett's favorite bear season — they're just coming out of hibernation, so they're more
irritable." He smiled at some remembered joke.
"Nothing more fun than an irritated grizzly bear," I agreed, nodding.
He snickered, shaking his head. "Tell me what you're really thinking, please."
"I'm trying to picture it — but I can't," I admitted. "How do you hunt a bear without weapons?"
"Oh, we have weapons." He flashed his bright teeth in a brief, threatening smile. I fought back a shiver
before it could expose me. "Just not the kind they consider when writing hunting laws. If you've ever seen
a bear attack on television, you should be able to visualize Emmett hunting."
I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria toward Emmett,
grateful that he wasn't looking my way. The thick bands of muscle that wrapped his arms and torso were
somehow even more menacing now.
Edward followed my gaze and chuckled. I stared at him, unnerved.
"Are you like a bear, too?" I asked in a low voice.
"More like the lion, or so they tell me," he said lightly. "Perhaps our preferences are indicative."

"I don't speak Car and Driver."
"It's a BMW." He rolled his eyes, not looking at me, trying to back out without running over the car
enthusiasts.
I nodded — I'd heard of that one.
"Are you still angry?" he asked as he carefully maneuvered his way out.
"Definitely."
He sighed. "Will you forgive me if I apologize?"
"Maybe… if you mean it. And if you promise not to do it again," I insisted.
His eyes were suddenly shrewd. "How about if I mean it, and I agree to let you drive Saturday?" he
countered my conditions.
I considered, and decided it was probably the best offer I would get. "Deal," I agreed.
"Then I'm very sorry I upset you." His eyes burned with sincerity for a protracted moment — playing
havoc with the rhythm of my heart — and then turned playful. "And I'll be on your doorstep bright and
early Saturday morning."
"Um, it doesn't help with the Charlie situation if an unexplained Volvo is left in the driveway."
His smile was condescending now. "I wasn't intending to bring a car."
"How —"
He cut me off. "Don't worry about it. I'll be there, no car."
I let it go. I had a more pressing question.
"Is it later yet?" I asked significantly.
He frowned. "I supposed it is later."
I kept my expression polite as I waited.
He stopped the car. I looked up, surprised — of course we were already at Charlie's house, parked
behind the truck. It was easier to ride with him if I only looked when it was over. When I looked back at
him, he was staring at me, measuring with his eyes.
"And you still want to know why you can't see me hunt?" He seemed solemn, but I thought I saw a trace
of humor deep in his eyes.
"Well," I clarified, "I was mostly wondering about your reaction."
"Did I frighten you?" Yes, there was definitely humor there.
"No," I lied. He didn't buy it.
"I apologize for scaring you," he persisted with a slight smile, but then all evidence of teasing disappeared.
"It was just the very thought of you being there… while we hunted." His jaw tightened.

"That would be bad?"
He spoke from between clenched teeth. "Extremely."
"Because… ?"
He took a deep breath and stared through the windshield at the thick, rolling clouds that seemed to press
down, almost within reach.
"When we hunt," he spoke slowly, unwillingly, "we give ourselves over to our senses… govern less with
our minds. Especially our sense of smell. If you were anywhere near me when I lost control that way…"
He shook his head, still gazing morosely at the heavy clouds.
I kept my expression firmly under control, expecting the swift flash of his eyes to judge my reaction that
soon followed. My face gave nothing away.
But our eyes held, and the silence deepened — and changed. Flickers of the electricity I'd felt this
afternoon began to charge the atmosphere as he gazed unrelentingly into my eyes. It wasn't until my head
started to swim that I realized I wasn't breathing. When I drew in a jagged breath, breaking the stillness,
he closed his eyes.
"Bella, I think you should go inside now." His low voice was rough, his eyes on the clouds again.
I opened the door, and the arctic draft that burst into the car helped clear my head. Afraid I might
stumble in my woozy state, I stepped carefully out of the car and shut the door behind me without
looking back. The whir of the automatic window unrolling made me turn.
"Oh, Bella?" he called after me, his voice more even. He leaned toward the open window with a faint
smile on his lips.
"Yes?"
"Tomorrow it's my turn."
"Your turn to what?"
He smiled wider, flashing his gleaming teeth. "Ask the questions."
And then he was gone, the car speeding down the street and disappearing around the corner before I
could even collect my thoughts. I smiled as I walked to the house. It was clear he was planning to see me
tomorrow, if nothing else.
That night Edward starred in my dreams, as usual. However, the climate of my unconsciousness had
changed. It thrilled with the same electricity that had charged the afternoon, and I tossed and turned
restlessly, waking often. It was only in the early hours of the morning that I finally sank into an exhausted,
dreamless sleep.
When I woke I was still tired, but edgy as well. I pulled on my brown turtleneck and the inescapable
jeans, sighing as I daydreamed of spaghetti straps and shorts. Breakfast was the usual, quiet event I
expected. Charlie fried eggs for himself; I had my bowl of cereal. I wondered if he had forgotten about
this Saturday. He answered my unspoken question as he stood up to take his plate to the sink.
"About this Saturday…" he began, walking across the kitchen and turning on the faucet.
I cringed. "Yes, Dad?"

"Are you still set on going to Seattle?" he asked.
"That was the plan." I grimaced, wishing he hadn't brought it up so I wouldn't have to compose careful
half-truths.
He squeezed some dish soap onto his plate and swirled it around with the brush. "And you're sure you
can't make it back in time for the dance?"
"I'm not going to the dance, Dad." I glared.
"Didn't anyone ask you?" he asked, trying to hide his concern by focusing on rinsing the plate.
I sidestepped the minefield. "It's a girl's choice."
"Oh." He frowned as he dried his plate.
I sympathized with him. It must be a hard thing, to be a father; living in fear that your daughter would
meet a boy she liked, but also having to worry if she didn't. How ghastly it would be, I thought,
shuddering, if Charlie had even the slightest inkling of exactly what I did like.
Charlie left then, with a goodbye wave, and I went upstairs to brush my teeth and gather my books.
When I heard the cruiser pull away, I could only wait a few seconds before I had to peek out of my
window. The silver car was already there, waiting in Charlie's spot on the driveway. I bounded down the
stairs and out the front door, wondering how long this bizarre routine would continue. I never wanted it to
end.
He waited in the car, not appearing to watch as I shut the door behind me without bothering to lock the
dead-bolt. I walked to the car, pausing shyly before opening the door and stepping in. He was smiling,
relaxed — and, as usual, perfect and beautiful to an excruciating degree.
"Good morning." His voice was silky. "How are you today?" His eyes roamed over my face, as if his
question was something more than simple courtesy.
"Good, thank you." I was always good — much more than good — when I was near him.
His gaze lingered on the circles under my eyes. "You look tired."
"I couldn't sleep," I confessed, automatically swinging my hair around my shoulder to provide some
measure of cover.
"Neither could I," he teased as he started the engine. I was becoming used to the quiet purr. I was sure
the roar of my truck would scare me, whenever I got to drive it again.
I laughed. "I guess that's right. I suppose I slept just a little bit more than you did."
"I'd wager you did."
"So what did you do last night?" I asked.
He chuckled. "Not a chance. It's my day to ask questions."
"Oh, that's right. What do you want to know?" My forehead creased. I couldn't imagine anything about
me that could be in any way interesting to him.
"What's your favorite color?" he asked, his face grave.

But his pause was very short.
"What kinds of flowers do you prefer?" he fired off.
I sighed in relief, and continued with the psychoanalysis.
Biology was a complication again. Edward had continued with his quizzing up until Mr. Banner entered
the room, dragging the audiovisual frame again. As the teacher approached the light switch, I noticed
Edward slide his chair slightly farther away from mine. It didn't help. As soon as the room was dark,
there was the same electric spark, the same restless craving to stretch my hand across the short space
and touch his cold skin, as yesterday.
I leaned forward on the table, resting my chin on my folded arms, my hidden fingers gripping the table's
edge as I fought to ignore the irrational longing that unsettled me. I didn't look at him, afraid that if he was
looking at me, it would only make self-control that much harder. I sincerely tried to watch the movie, but
at the end of the hour I had no idea what I'd just seen. I sighed in relief again when Mr. Banner turned the
lights on, finally glancing at Edward; he was looking at me, his eyes ambivalent.
He rose in silence and then stood still, waiting for me. We walked toward the gym in silence, like
yesterday. And, also like yesterday, he touched my face wordlessly — this time with the back of his cool
hand, stroking once from my temple to my jaw — before he turned and walked away.
Gym passed quickly as I watched Mike's one-man badminton show. He didn't speak to me today, either
in response to my vacant expression or because he was still angry about our squabble yesterday.
Somewhere, in a corner of my mind, I felt bad about that. But I couldn't concentrate on him.
I hurried to change afterward, ill at ease, knowing the faster I moved, the sooner I would be with
Edward. The pressure made me more clumsy than usual, but eventually I made it out the door, feeling the
same release when I saw him standing there, a wide smile automatically spreading across my face. He
smiled in reaction before launching into more cross-examination.
His questions were different now, though, not as easily answered. He wanted to know what I missed
about home, insisting on descriptions of anything he wasn't familiar with. We sat in front of Charlie's
house for hours, as the sky darkened and rain plummeted around us in a sudden deluge.
I tried to describe impossible things like the scent of creosote — bitter, slightly resinous, but still pleasant
— the high, keening sound of the cicadas in July, the feathery barrenness of the trees, the very size of the
sky, extending white-blue from horizon to horizon, barely interrupted by the low mountains covered with
purple volcanic rock. The hardest thing to explain was why it was so beautiful to me — to justify a
beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that had
more to do with the exposed shape of the land, with the shallow bowls of valleys between the craggy
hills, and the way they held on to the sun. I found myself using my hands as I tried to describe it to him.
His quiet, probing questions kept me talking freely, forgetting, in the dim light of the storm, to be
embarrassed for monopolizing the conversation. Finally, when I had finished detailing my cluttered room
at home, he paused instead of responding with another question.
"Are you finished?" I asked in relief.
"Not even close — but your father will be home soon."
"Charlie!" I suddenly recalled his existence, and sighed. I looked out at the rain-darkened sky, but it gave
nothing away. "How late is it?" I wondered out loud as I glanced at the clock. I was surprised by the time

— Charlie would be driving home now.
"It's twilight," Edward murmured, looking at the western horizon, obscured as it was with clouds. His
voice was thoughtful, as if his mind were somewhere far away. I stared at him as he gazed unseeingly out
the windshield.
I was still staring when his eyes suddenly shifted back to mine.
"It's the safest time of day for us," he said, answering the unspoken question in my eyes. "The easiest
time. But also the saddest, in a way… the end of another day, the return of the night. Darkness is so
predictable, don't you think?" He smiled wistfully.
"I like the night. Without the dark, we'd never see the stars." I frowned. "Not that you see them here
much."
He laughed, and the mood abruptly lightened.
"Charlie will be here in a few minutes. So, unless you want to tell him that you'll be with me Saturday…"
He raised one eyebrow.
"Thanks, but no thanks." I gathered my books, realizing I was stiff from sitting still so long. "So is it my
turn tomorrow, then?"
"Certainly not!" His face was teasingly outraged. "I told you I wasn't done, didn't I?"
"What more is there?"
"You'll find out tomorrow." He reached across to open my door for me, and his sudden proximity sent
my heart into frenzied palpitations.
But his hand froze on the handle.
"Not good," he muttered.
"What is it?" I was surprised to see that his jaw was clenched, his eyes disturbed.
He glanced at me for a brief second. "Another complication," he said glumly.
He flung the door open in one swift movement, and then moved, almost cringed, swiftly away from me.
The flash of headlights through the rain caught my attention as a dark car pulled up to the curb just a few
feet away, facing us.
"Charlie's around the corner," he warned, staring through the downpour at the other vehicle.
I hopped out at once, despite my confusion and curiosity. The rain was louder as it glanced off my
jacket.
I tried to make out the shapes in the front seat of the other car, but it was too dark. I could see Edward
illuminated in the glare of the new car's headlights; he was still staring ahead, his gaze locked on
something or someone I couldn't see. His expression was a strange mix of frustration and defiance.
Then he revved the engine, and the tires squealed against the wet pavement. The Volvo was out of sight
in seconds.

"Hey, Bella," called a familiar, husky voice from the driver's side of the little black car.
"Jacob?" I asked, squinting through the rain. Just then, Charlie's cruiser swung around the corner, his
lights shining on the occupants of the car in front of me.
Jacob was already climbing out, his wide grin visible even through the darkness. In the passenger seat
was a much older man, a heavyset man with a memorable face — a face that overflowed, the cheeks
resting against his shoulders, with creases running through the russet skin like an old leather jacket. And
the surprisingly familiar eyes, black eyes that seemed at the same time both too young and too ancient for
the broad face they were set in. Jacob's father, Billy Black. I knew him immediately, though in the more
than five years since I'd seen him last I'd managed to forget his name when Charlie had spoken of him my
first day here. He was staring at me, scrutinizing my face, so I smiled tentatively at him. His eyes were
wide, as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. My smile faded.
Another complication, Edward had said.
Billy still stared at me with intense, anxious eyes. I groaned internally. Had Billy recognized Edward so
easily? Could he really believe the impossible legends his son had scoffed at?
The answer was clear in Billy's eyes. Yes. Yes, he could.

"Billy!" Charlie called as soon as he got out of the car.
I turned toward the house, beckoning to Jacob as I ducked under the porch. I heard Charlie greeting
them loudly behind me.
"I'm going to pretend I didn't see you behind the wheel, Jake," he said disapprovingly.
"We get permits early on the rez," Jacob said while I unlocked the door and flicked on the porch light.
"Sure you do," Charlie laughed.
"I have to get around somehow." I recognized Billy's resonant voice easily, despite the years. The sound
of it made me feel suddenly younger, a child.
I went inside, leaving the door open behind me and turning on lights before I hung up my jacket. Then I
stood in the door, watching anxiously as Charlie and Jacob helped Billy out of the car and into his
wheelchair.
I backed out of the way as the three of them hurried in, shaking off the rain.
"This is a surprise," Charlie was saying.
"It's been too long," Billy answered. "I hope it's not a bad time." His dark eyes flashed up to me again,
their expression unreadable.
"No, it's great. I hope you can stay for the game."
Jacob grinned. "I think that's the plan — our TV broke last week."

Billy made a face at his son. "And, of course, Jacob was anxious to see Bella again," he added. Jacob
scowled and ducked his head while I fought back a surge of remorse. Maybe I'd been too convincing on
the beach.
"Are you hungry?" I asked, turning toward the kitchen. I was eager to escape Billy's searching gaze.
"Naw, we ate just before we came," Jacob answered.
"How about you, Charlie?" I called over my shoulder as I fled around the corner.
"Sure," he replied, his voice moving in the direction of the front room and the TV. I could hear Billy's
chair follow.
The grilled cheese sandwiches were in the frying pan and I was slicing up a tomato when I sensed
someone behind me.
"So, how are things?" Jacob asked.
"Pretty good." I smiled. His enthusiasm was hard to resist. "How about you? Did you finish your car?"
"No." He frowned. "I still need parts. We borrowed that one." He pointed with his thumb in the direction
of the front yard.
"Sorry. I haven't seen any… what was it you were looking for?"
"Master cylinder." He grinned. "Is something wrong with the truck?" he added suddenly.
"No."
"Oh. I just wondered because you weren't driving it."
I stared down at the pan, pulling up the edge of a sandwich to check the bottom side. "I got a ride with a
friend."
"Nice ride." Jacob's voice was admiring. "I didn't recognize the driver, though. I thought I knew most of
the kids around here."
I nodded noncommittally, keeping my eyes down as I flipped sandwiches.
"My dad seemed to know him from somewhere."
"Jacob, could you hand me some plates? They're in the cupboard over the sink."
"Sure."
He got the plates in silence. I hoped he would let it drop now.
"So who was it?" he asked, setting two plates on the counter next to me.
I sighed in defeat. "Edward Cullen."
To my surprise, he laughed. I glanced up at him. He looked a little embarrassed.
"Guess that explains it, then," he said. "I wondered why my dad was acting so strange."
"That's right." I faked an innocent expression. "He doesn't like the Cullens."

"Superstitious old man," Jacob muttered under his breath.
"You don't think he'd say anything to Charlie?" I couldn't help asking, the words coming out in a low
rush.
Jacob stared at me for a moment, and I couldn't read the expression in his dark eyes. "I doubt it," he
finally answered. "I think Charlie chewed him out pretty good last time. They haven't spoken much since
— tonight is sort of a reunion, I think. I don't think he'd bring it up again."
"Oh," I said, trying to sound indifferent.
I stayed in the front room after I carried the food out to Charlie, pretending to watch the game while
Jacob chattered at me. I was really listening to the men's conversation, watching for any sign that Billy
was about to rat me out, trying to think of ways to stop him if he began.
It was a long night. I had a lot of homework that was going undone, but I was afraid to leave Billy alone
with Charlie. Finally, the game ended.
"Are you and your friends coming back to the beach soon?" Jacob asked as he pushed his father over
the lip of the threshold.
"I'm not sure," I hedged.
"That was fun, Charlie," Billy said.
"Come up for the next game," Charlie encouraged.
"Sure, sure," Billy said. "We'll be here. Have a good night." His eyes shifted to mine, and his smile
disappeared. "You take care, Bella," he added seriously.
"Thanks," I muttered, looking away.
I headed for the stairs while Charlie waved from the doorway.
"Wait, Bella," he said.
I cringed. Had Billy gotten something in before I'd joined them in the living room?
But Charlie was relaxed, still grinning from the unexpected visit.
"I didn't get a chance to talk to you tonight. How was your day?"
"Good." I hesitated with one foot on the first stair, searching for details I could safely share. "My
badminton team won all four games."
"Wow, I didn't know you could play badminton."
"Well, actually I can't, but my partner is really good," I admitted.
"Who is it?" he asked with token interest.
"Um… Mike Newton," I told him reluctantly.
"Oh yeah — you said you were friends with the Newton kid." He perked up. "Nice family." He mused
for a minute. "Why didn't you ask him to the dance this weekend?"

I slept better that night, too tired to dream again. When I woke to the pearl gray morning, my mood was
blissful. The tense evening with Billy and Jacob seemed harmless enough now; I decided to forget it
completely. I caught myself whistling while I was pulling the front part of my hair back into a barrette, and
later again as I skipped down the stairs. Charlie noticed.
"You're cheerful this morning," he commented over breakfast.
I shrugged. "It's Friday."
I hurried so I would be ready to go the second Charlie left. I had my bag ready, shoes on, teeth brushed,
but even though I rushed to the door as soon as I was sure Charlie would be out of sight, Edward was
faster. He was waiting in his shiny car, windows down, engine off.
I didn't hesitate this time, climbing in the passenger side quickly, the sooner to see his face. He grinned his
crooked smile at me, stopping my breath and my heart. I couldn't imagine how an angel could be any
more glorious. There was nothing about him that could be improved upon.
"How did you sleep?" he asked. I wondered if he had any idea how appealing his voice was.
"Fine. How was your night?"
"Pleasant." His smile was amused; I felt like I was missing an inside joke.
"Can I ask what you did?" I asked.
"No." He grinned. "Today is still mine."
He wanted to know about people today: more about Renée, her hobbies, what we'd done in our free
time together. And then the one grandmother I'd known, my few school friends — embarrassing me
when he asked about boys I'd dated. I was relieved that I'd never really dated anyone, so that particular
conversation couldn't last long. He seemed as surprised as Jessica and Angela by my lack of romantic
history.
"So you never met anyone you wanted?" he asked in a serious tone that made me wonder what he was
thinking about.
I was grudgingly honest. "Not in Phoenix."
His lips pressed together into a hard line.
We were in the cafeteria at this point. The day had sped by in the blur that was rapidly becoming routine.
I took advantage of his brief pause to take a bite of my bagel.

"I should have let you drive yourself today," he announced, apropos of nothing, while I chewed.
"Why?" I demanded.
"I'm leaving with Alice after lunch."
"Oh." I blinked, bewildered and disappointed. "That's okay, it's not that far of a walk."
He frowned at me impatiently. "I'm not going to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave
it here for you."
"I don't have my key with me," I sighed. "I really don't mind walking." What I minded was losing my time
with him.
He shook his head. "Your truck will be here, and the key will be in the ignition — unless you're afraid
someone might steal it." He laughed at the thought.
"All right," I agreed, pursing my lips. I was pretty sure my key was in the pocket of a pair of jeans I wore
Wednesday, under a pile of clothes in the laundry room. Even if he broke into my house, or whatever he
was planning, he'd never find it. He seemed to feel the challenge in my consent. He smirked,
overconfident.
"So where are you going?" I asked as casually as I could manage.
"Hunting," he answered grimly. "If I'm going to be alone with you tomorrow, I'm going to take whatever
precautions I can." His face grew morose… and pleading. "You can always cancel, you know."
I looked down, afraid of the persuasive power of his eyes. I refused to be convinced to fear him, no
matter how real the danger might be. It doesn't matter, I repeated in my head.
"No," I whispered, glancing back at his face. "I can't."
"Perhaps you're right," he murmured bleakly. His eyes seemed to darken in color as I watched.
I changed the subject. "What time will I see you tomorrow?" I asked, already depressed by the thought
of him leaving now.
"That depends… it's a Saturday, don't you want to sleep in?" he offered.
"No," I answered too fast. He restrained a smile.
"The same time as usual, then," he decided. "Will Charlie be there?"
"No, he's fishing tomorrow." I beamed at the memory of how conveniently things had worked out.
His voice turned sharp. "And if you don't come home, what will he think?"
"I have no idea," I answered coolly. "He knows I've been meaning to do the laundry. Maybe he'll think I
fell in the washer."
He scowled at me and I scowled back. His anger was much more impressive than mine.
"What are you hunting tonight?" I asked when I was sure I had lost the glowering contest.
"Whatever we find in the park. We aren't going far." He seemed bemused by my casual reference to his
secret realities.

The sound of the truck roaring to life frightened me. I laughed at myself.
When I got home, the handle of the door was locked, the dead bolt unlocked, just as I'd left it this
morning. Inside, I went straight to the laundry room. It looked just the same as I'd left it, too. I dug for
my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I
thought, shaking my head.
Following the same instinct that had prompted me to lie to Mike, I called Jessica on the pretense of
wishing her luck at the dance. When she offered the same wish for my day with Edward, I told her about
the cancellation. She was more disappointed than really necessary for a third-party observer to be. I said
goodbye quickly after that.
Charlie was absentminded at dinner, worried over something at work, I guessed, or maybe a basketball
game, or maybe he was just really enjoying the lasagna — it was hard to tell with Charlie.
"You know, Dad…" I began, breaking into his reverie.
"What's that, Bell?"
"I think you're right about Seattle. I think I'll wait until Jessica or someone else can go with me."
"Oh," he said, surprised. "Oh, okay. So, do you want me to stay home?"
"No, Dad, don't change your plans. I've got a million things to do… homework, laundry… I need to go
to the library and the grocery store. I'll be in and out all day… you go and have fun."
"Are you sure?"
"Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe
three years' supply."
"You're sure easy to live with, Bella." He smiled.
"I could say the same thing about you," I said, laughing. The sound of my laughter was off, but he didn't
seem to notice. I felt so guilty for deceiving him that I almost took Edward's advice and told him where I
would be. Almost.
After dinner, I folded clothes and moved another load through the dryer. Unfortunately it was the kind of
job that only keeps hands busy. My mind definitely had too much free time, and it was getting out of
control. I fluctuated between anticipation so intense that it was very nearly pain, and an insidious fear that
picked at my resolve. I had to keep reminding myself that I'd made my choice, and I wasn't going back
on it. I pulled his note out of my pocket much more often than necessary to absorb the two small words
he'd written. He wants me to be safe, I told myself again and again. I would just hold on to the faith that,
in the end, that desire would win out over the others. And what was my other choice — to cut him out of
my life? Intolerable. Besides, since I'd come to Forks, it really seemed like my life was about him.
But a tiny voice in the back of my mind worried, wondering if it would hurt very much… if it ended
badly.
I was relieved when it was late enough to be acceptable for bedtime. I knew I was far too stressed to
sleep, so I did something I'd never done before. I deliberately took unnecessary cold medicine — the
kind that knocked me out for a good eight hours. I normally wouldn't condone that type of behavior in
myself, but tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on
top of everything else. While I waited for the drugs to kick in, I dried my clean hair till it was impeccably

I woke early, having slept soundly and dreamlessly thanks to my gratuitous drug use. Though I was well
rested, I slipped right back into the same hectic frenzy from the night before. I dressed in a rush,
smoothing my collar against my neck, fidgeting with the tan sweater till it hung right over my jeans. I
sneaked a swift look out the window to see that Charlie was already gone. A thin, cottony layer of
clouds veiled the sky. They didn't look very lasting.
I ate breakfast without tasting the food, hurrying to clean up when I was done. I peeked out the window
again, but nothing had changed. I had just finished brushing my teeth and was heading back downstairs
when a quiet knock sent my heart thudding against my rib cage.
I flew to the door; I had a little trouble with the simple dead bolt, but I yanked the door open at last, and
there he was. All the agitation dissolved as soon as I looked at his face, calm taking its place. I breathed
a sigh of relief — yesterday's fears seemed very foolish with him here.
He wasn't smiling at first — his face was somber. But then his expression lightened as he looked me
over, and he laughed.
"Good morning," he chuckled.
"What's wrong?" I glanced down to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants.
"We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a long, light tan sweater on, with a white collar showing
underneath, and blue jeans. I laughed with him, hiding a secret twinge of regret — why did he have to
look like a runway model when I couldn't?
I locked the door behind me while he walked to the truck. He waited by the passenger door with a
martyred expression that was easy to understand.
"We made a deal," I reminded him smugly, climbing into the driver's seat, and reaching over to unlock his
door.
"Where to?" I asked.
"Put your seat belt on — I'm nervous already."
I gave him a dirty look as I complied.
"Where to?" I repeated with a sigh.
"Take the one-oh-one north," he ordered.
It was surprisingly difficult to concentrate on the road while feeling his gaze on my face. I compensated
by driving more carefully than usual through the still-sleeping town.
"Were you planning to make it out of Forks before nightfall?"
"This truck is old enough to be your car's grandfather — have some respect," I retorted.

We were soon out of the town limits, despite his negativity. Thick underbrush and green-swathed trunks
replaced the lawns and houses.
"Turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as I was about to ask. I obeyed silently.
"Now we drive until the pavement ends."
I could hear a smile in his voice, but I was too afraid of driving off the road and proving him right to look
over and be sure.
"And what's there, at the pavement's end?" I wondered.
"A trail."
"We're hiking?" Thank goodness I'd worn tennis shoes.
"Is that a problem?" He sounded as if he'd expected as much.
"No." I tried to make the lie sound confident. But if he thought my truck was slow…
"Don't worry, it's only five miles or so, and we're in no hurry."
Five miles. I didn't answer, so that he wouldn't hear my voice crack in panic. Five miles of treacherous
roots and loose stones, trying to twist my ankles or otherwise incapacitate me. This was going to be
humiliating.
We drove in silence for a while as I contemplated the coming horror.
"What are you thinking?" he asked impatiently after a few moments.
I lied again. "Just wondering where we're going."
"It's a place I like to go when the weather is nice." We both glanced out the windows at the thinning
clouds after he spoke.
"Charlie said it would be warm today."
"And did you tell Charlie what you were up to?" he asked.
"Nope."
"But Jessica thinks we're going to Seattle together?" He seemed cheered by the idea.
"No, I told her you canceled on me — which is true."
"No one knows you're with me?" Angrily, now.
"That depends… I assume you told Alice?"
"That's very helpful, Bella," he snapped.
I pretended I didn't hear that.
"Are you so depressed by Forks that it's made you suicidal?" he demanded when I ignored him.
"You said it might cause trouble for you… us being together publicly," I reminded him.

"Should your father know I'm here?" he asked.
"I'm not sure…" I tried to think it through quickly.
"Another time then…"
And I was alone.
"Edward!" I hissed.
I heard a ghostly chuckle, then nothing else.
My father's key turned in the door.
"Bella?" he called. It had bothered me before; who else would it be? Suddenly he didn't seem so far off
base.
"In here." I hoped he couldn't hear the hysterical edge to my voice. I grabbed my dinner from the
microwave and sat at the table as he walked in. His footsteps sounded so noisy after my day with
Edward.
"Can you get me some of that? I'm bushed." He stepped on the heels of his boots to take them off,
holding the back of Edward's chair for support.
I took my food with me, scarfing it down as I got his dinner. It burned my tongue. I filled two glasses with
milk while his lasagna was heating, and gulped mine to put out the fire. As I set the glass down, I noticed
the milk trembling and realized my hand was shaking. Charlie sat in the chair, and the contrast between
him and its former occupant was comical.
"Thanks," he said as I placed his food on the table.
"How was your day?" I asked. The words were rushed; I was dying to escape to my room.
"Good. The fish were biting… how about you? Did you get everything done that you wanted to?"
"Not really — it was too nice out to stay indoors." I took another big bite.
"It was a nice day," he agreed. What an understatement, I thought to myself.
Finished with the last bite of lasagna, I lifted my glass and chugged the remains of my milk.
Charlie surprised me by being observant. "In a hurry?"
"Yeah, I'm tired. I'm going to bed early."
"You look kinda keyed up," he noted. Why, oh why, did this have to be his night to pay attention?
"Do I?" was all I could manage in response. I quickly scrubbed my dishes clean in the sink, and placed
them upside down on a dish towel to dry.
"It's Saturday," he mused.
I didn't respond.
"No plans tonight?" he asked suddenly.

"No, Dad, I just want to get some sleep."
"None of the boys in town your type, eh?" He was suspicious, but trying to play it cool.
"No, none of the boys have caught my eye yet." I was careful not to over-emphasize the word boys in
my quest to be truthful with Charlie.
"I thought maybe that Mike Newton… you said he was friendly."
"He's Just a friend, Dad."
"Well, you're too good for them all, anyway. Wait till you get to college to start looking." Every father's
dream, that his daughter will be out of the house before the hormones kick in.
"Sounds like a good idea to me," I agreed as I headed up the stairs.
"'Night, honey," he called after me. No doubt he would be listening carefully all evening, waiting for me to
try to sneak out.
"See you in the morning, Dad." See you creeping into my room tonight at midnight to check on me.
I worked to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked up the stairs to my room. I shut the door
loud enough for him to hear, and then sprinted on my tiptoes to the window. I threw it open and leaned
out into the night. My eyes scanned the darkness, the impenetrable shadows of the trees.
"Edward?" I whispered, feeling completely idiotic.
The quiet, laughing response came from behind me. "Yes?"
I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise.
He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture
of ease.
"Oh!" I breathed, sinking unsteadily to the floor.
"I'm sorry." He pressed his lips together, trying to hide his amusement.
"Just give me a minute to restart my heart."
He sat up slowly, so as not to startle me again. Then he leaned forward and reached out with his long
arms to pick me up, gripping the tops of my arms like I was a toddler. He sat me on the bed beside him.
"Why don't you sit with me," he suggested, putting a cold hand on mine. "How's the heart?"
"You tell me — I'm sure you hear it better than I do."
I felt his quiet laughter shake the bed.
We sat there for a moment in silence, both listening to my heartbeat slow. I thought about having Edward
in my room, with my father in the house.
"Can I have a minute to be human?" I asked.
"Certainly." He gestured with one hand that I should proceed.

"Stay," I said, trying to look severe.
"Yes, ma'am." And he made a show of becoming a statue on the edge of my bed.
I hopped up, grabbing my pajamas from off the floor, my bag of toiletries off the desk. I left the light off
and slipped out, closing the door.
I could hear the sound from the TV rising up the stairs. I banged the bathroom door loudly, so Charlie
wouldn't come up to bother me.
I meant to hurry. I brushed my teeth fiercely, trying to be thorough and speedy, removing all traces of
lasagna. But the hot water of the shower couldn't be rushed. It unknotted the muscles in my back, calmed
my pulse. The familiar smell of my shampoo made me feel like I might be the same person I had been this
morning. I tried not to think of Edward, sitting in my room, waiting, because then I had to start all over
with the calming process. Finally, I couldn't delay anymore. I shut off the water, toweling hastily, rushing
again. I pulled on my holey t-shirt and gray sweatpants. Too late to regret not packing the Victoria's
Secret silk pajamas my mother got me two birthdays ago, which still had the tags on them in a drawer
somewhere back home.
I rubbed the towel through my hair again, and then yanked the brush through it quickly. I threw the towel
in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie
could see that I was in my pajamas, with wet hair.
"'Night, Dad."
"'Night, Bella." He did look startled by my appearance. Maybe that would keep him from checking on
me tonight.
I took the stairs two at a time, trying to be quiet, and flew into my room, closing the door tightly behind
me.
Edward hadn't moved a fraction of an inch, a carving of Adonis perched on my faded quilt. I smiled, and
his lips twitched, the statue coming to life.
His eyes appraised me, taking in the damp hair, the tattered shirt. He raised one eyebrow. "Nice."
I grimaced.
"No, it looks good on you."
"Thanks," I whispered. I went back to his side, sitting cross-legged beside him. I looked at the lines in the
wooden floor.
"What was all that for?"
"Charlie thinks I'm sneaking out."
"Oh." He contemplated that. "Why?" As if he couldn't know Charlie's mind much more clearly than I
could guess.
"Apparently, I look a little overexcited."
He lifted my chin, examining my face.
"You look very warm, actually."

"And then the line started forming," he chuckled. I scowled in the darkness.
"I waited, unreasonably anxious to hear what you would say to them, to watch your expressions. I
couldn't deny the relief I felt, watching the annoyance on your face. But I couldn't be sure.
"That was the first night I came here. I wrestled all night, while watching you sleep, with the chasm
between what I knew was right, moral, ethical, and what I wanted. I knew that if I continued to ignore
you as I should, or if I left for a few years, till you were gone, that someday you would say yes to Mike,
or someone like him. It made me angry.
"And then," he whispered, "as you were sleeping, you said my name. You spoke so clearly, at first I
thought you'd woken. But you rolled over restlessly and mumbled my name once more, and sighed. The
feeling that coursed through me then was unnerving, staggering. And I knew I couldn't ignore you any
longer." He was silent for a moment, probably listening to the suddenly uneven pounding of my heart.
"But jealousy… it's a strange thing. So much more powerful than I would have thought. And irrational!
Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton…" He shook his head angrily.
"I should have known you'd be listening," I groaned.
"Of course."
"That made you feel jealous, though, really?"
"I'm new at this; you're resurrecting the human in me, and everything feels stronger because it's fresh."
"But honestly," I teased, "for that to bother you, after I have to hear that Rosalie — Rosalie, the
incarnation of pure beauty, Rosalie — was meant for you. Emmett or no Emmett, how can I compete
with that?"
"There's no competition." His teeth gleamed. He drew my trapped hands around his back, holding me to
his chest. I kept as still as I could, even breathing with caution.
"I know there's no competition," I mumbled into his cold skin. "That's the problem."
"Of course Rosalie is beautiful in her way, but even if she wasn't like a sister to me, even if Emmett didn't
belong with her, she could never have one tenth, no, one hundredth of the attraction you hold for me." He
was serious now, thoughtful. "For almost ninety years I've walked among my kind, and yours… all the
time thinking I was complete in myself, not realizing what I was seeking. And not finding anything,
because you weren't alive yet."
"It hardly seems fair," I whispered, my face still resting on his chest, listening to his breath come and go. "I
haven't had to wait at all. Why should I get off so easily?"
"You're right," he agreed with amusement. "I should make this harder for you, definitely." He freed one of
his hands, released my wrist, only to gather it carefully into his other hand. He stroked my wet hair softly,
from the top of my head to my waist. "You only have to risk your life every second you spend with me,
that's surely not much. You only have to turn your back on nature, on humanity… what's that worth?"
"Very little — I don't feel deprived of anything."
"Not yet." And his voice was abruptly full of ancient grief.
I tried to pull back, to look in his face, but his hand locked my wrists in an unbreakable hold.

"What —" I started to ask, when his body became alert. I froze, but he suddenly released my hands, and
disappeared. I narrowly avoided falling on my face.
"Lie down!" he hissed. I couldn't tell where he spoke from in the darkness.
I rolled under my quilt, balling up on my side, the way I usually slept. I heard the door crack open, as
Charlie peeked in to make sure I was where I was supposed to be. I breathed evenly, exaggerating the
movement.
A long minute passed. I listened, not sure if I'd heard the door close. Then Edward's cool arm was
around me, under the covers, his lips at my ear.
"You are a terrible actress — I'd say that career path is out for you."
"Darn it," I muttered. My heart was crashing in my chest.
He hummed a melody I didn't recognize; it sounded like a lullaby.
He paused. "Should I sing you to sleep?"
"Right," I laughed. "Like I could sleep with you here!"
"You do it all the time," he reminded me.
"But I didn't know you were here," I replied icily.
"So if you don't want to sleep…" he suggested, ignoring my tone. My breath caught.
"If I don't want to sleep… ?"
He chuckled. "What do you want to do then?"
I couldn't answer at first.
"I'm not sure," I finally said.
"Tell me when you decide."
I could feel his cool breath on my neck, feel his nose sliding along my jaw, inhaling.
"I thought you were desensitized."
"Just because I'm resisting the wine doesn't mean I can't appreciate the bouquet," he whispered. "You
have a very floral smell, like lavender… or freesia," he noted. "It's mouthwatering."
"Yeah, it's an off day when I don't get somebody telling me how edible I smell."
He chuckled, and then sighed.
"I've decided what I want to do," I told him. "I want to hear more about you."
"Ask me anything."
I sifted through my questions for the most vital. "Why do you do it?" I said. "I still don't understand how
you can work so hard to resist what you… are. Please don't misunderstand, of course I'm glad that you
do. I just don't see why you would bother in the first place."

"Your hair looks like a haystack… but I like it." His unruffled voice came from the rocking chair in the
corner.
"Edward! You stayed!" I rejoiced, and thoughtlessly threw myself across the room and into his lap. In the
instant that my thoughts caught up with my actions, I froze, shocked by my own uncontrolled enthusiasm.
I stared up at him, afraid that I had crossed the wrong line.
But he laughed.
"Of course," he answered, startled, but seeming pleased by my reaction. His hands rubbed my back.
I laid my head cautiously against his shoulder, breathing in the smell of his skin.
"I was sure it was a dream."
"You're not that creative," he scoffed.
"Charlie!" I remembered, thoughtlessly jumping up again and heading to the door.
"He left an hour ago — after reattaching your battery cables, I might add. I have to admit I was
disappointed. Is that really all it would take to stop you, if you were determined to go?"
I deliberated where I stood, wanting to return to him badly, but afraid I might have morning breath.
"You're not usually this confused in the morning," he noted. He held his arms open for me to return. A
nearly irresistible invitation.
"I need another human minute," I admitted.
"I'll wait."
I skipped to the bathroom, my emotions unrecognizable. I didn't know myself, inside or out. The face in
the mirror was practically a stranger — eyes too bright, hectic spots of red across my cheekbones. After
I brushed my teeth, I worked to straighten out the tangled chaos that was my hair. I splashed my face
with cold water, and tried to breathe normally, with no noticeable success. I half-ran back to my room.
It seemed like a miracle that he was there, his arms still waiting for me. He reached out to me, and my
heart thumped unsteadily.
"Welcome back," he murmured, taking me into his arms.
He rocked me for a while in silence, until I noticed that his clothes were changed, his hair smooth.
"You left?" I accused, touching the collar of his fresh shirt.
"I could hardly leave in the clothes I came in — what would the neighbors think?"
I pouted.
"You were very deeply asleep; I didn't miss anything." His eyes gleamed. "The talking came earlier."
I groaned. "What did you hear?"
His gold eyes grew very soft. "You said you loved me."
"You knew that already," I reminded him, ducking my head.

"Are you afraid now?" He sounded hopeful.
"Yes," I admitted; how could I deny it — he could see my eyes.
"Don't worry." He smirked. "I'll protect you."
"I'm not afraid of them," I explained. "I'm afraid they won't… like me. Won't they be, well, surprised that
you would bring someone… like me… home to meet them? Do they know that I know about them?"
"Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his voice
was harsh — "on whether I'd bring you back, though why anyone would bet against Alice, I can't
imagine. At any rate, we don't have secrets in the family. It's not really feasible, what with my mind
reading and Alice seeing the future and all that."
"And Jasper making you feel all warm and fuzzy about spilling your guts, don't forget that."
"You paid attention," he smiled approvingly.
"I've been known to do that every now and then." I grimaced. "So did Alice see me coming?"
His reaction was strange. "Something like that," he said uncomfortably, turning away so I couldn't see his
eyes. I stared at him curiously.
"Is that any good?" he asked, turning back to me abruptly and eyeing my breakfast with a teasing look on
his face. "Honestly, it doesn't look very appetizing."
"Well, it's no irritable grizzly…" I murmured, ignoring him when he glowered. I was still wondering why
he responded that way when I mentioned Alice. I hurried through my cereal, speculating.
He stood in the middle of the kitchen, the statue of Adonis again, staring abstractedly out the back
windows.
Then his eyes were back on me, and he smiled his heartbreaking smile.
"And you should introduce me to your father, too, I think."
"He already knows you," I reminded him.
"As your boyfriend, I mean."
I stared at him with suspicion. "Why?"
"Isn't that customary?" he asked innocently.
"I don't know," I admitted. My dating history gave me few reference points to work with. Not that any
normal rules of dating applied here. "That's not necessary, you know. I don't expect you to… I mean,
you don't have to pretend for me."
His smile was patient. "I'm not pretending."
I pushed the remains of my cereal around the edges of the bowl, biting my lip.
"Are you going to tell Charlie I'm your boyfriend or not?" he demanded.
"Is that what you are?" I suppressed my internal cringing at the thought of Edward and Charlie and the
word boy friend all in the same room at the same time.

It was just beginning to drizzle when Edward turned onto my street. Up until that moment, I'd had no
doubt that he'd be staying with me while I spent a few interim hours in the real world.
And then I saw the black car, a weathered Ford, parked in Charlie's driveway — and heard Edward
mutter something unintelligible in a low, harsh voice.
Leaning away from the rain under the shallow front porch, Jacob Black stood behind his father's
wheelchair. Billy's face was impassive as stone as Edward parked my truck against the curb. Jacob
stared down, his expression mortified.
Edward's low voice was furious. "This is crossing the line."
"He came to warn Charlie?" I guessed, more horrified than angry.
Edward just nodded, answering Billy's gaze through the rain with narrowed eyes.
I felt weak with relief that Charlie wasn't home yet.
"Let me deal with this," I suggested. Edward's black glare made me anxious.
To my surprise, he agreed. "That's probably best. Be careful, though. The child has no idea."
I bridled a little at the word child. "Jacob is not that much younger than I am," I reminded him.

He looked at me then, his anger abruptly fading. "Oh, I know," he assured me with a grin.
I sighed and put my hand on the door handle.
"Get them inside," he instructed, "so I can leave. I'll be back around dusk."
"Do you want my truck?" I offered, meanwhile wondering how I would explain its absence to Charlie.
He rolled his eyes. "I could walk home faster than this truck moves."
"You don't have to leave," I said wistfully.
He smiled at my glum expression. "Actually, I do. After you get rid of them" — he threw a dark glance in
the Blacks' direction — "you still have to prepare Charlie to meet your new boyfriend." He grinned
widely, showing all of his teeth.
I groaned. "Thanks a lot."
He smiled the crooked smile that I loved. "I'll be back soon," he promised. His eyes flickered back to the
porch, and then he leaned in to swiftly kiss me just under the edge of my jaw. My heart lurched
frantically, and I, too, glanced toward the porch. Billy's face was no longer impassive, and his hands
clutched at the armrests of his chair.
"Soon," I stressed as I opened the door and stepped out into the rain.
I could feel his eyes on my back as I half-ran through the light sprinkle toward the porch.
"Hey, Billy. Hi, Jacob." I greeted them as cheerfully as I could manage. "Charlie's gone for the day — I
hope you haven't been waiting long."
"Not long," Billy said in a subdued tone. His black eyes were piercing. "I just wanted to bring this up." He
indicated a brown paper sack resting in his lap.
"Thanks," I said, though I had no idea what it could be. "Why don't you come in for a minute and dry
off?"
I pretended to be oblivious to his intense scrutiny as I unlocked the door, and waved them in ahead of
me.
"Here, let me take that," I offered, turning to shut the door. I allowed myself one last glance at Edward.
He was waiting, perfectly still, his eyes solemn.
"You'll want to put it in the fridge," Billy noted as he handed me the package. "It's some of Harry
Clearwater's homemade fish fry — Charlie's favorite. The fridge keeps it drier." He shrugged.
"Thanks," I repeated, but with feeling this time. "I was running out of new ways to fix fish, and he's bound
to bring home more tonight."
"Fishing again?" Billy asked with a subtle gleam in his eye. "Down at the usual spot? Maybe I'll run by
and see him."
"No," I quickly lied, my face going hard. "He was headed someplace new… but I have no idea where."
He took in my changed expression, and it made him thoughtful.

"Jake," he said, still appraising me. "Why don't you go get that new picture of Rebecca out of the car? I'll
leave that for Charlie, too."
"Where is it?" Jacob asked, his voice morose. I glanced at him, but he was staring at the floor, his
eyebrows pulling together.
"I think I saw it in the trunk," Billy said. "You may have to dig for it."
Jacob slouched back out into the rain.
Billy and I faced each other in silence. After a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned
and headed to the kitchen. I could hear his wet wheels squeak against the linoleum as he followed.
I shoved the bag onto the crowded top shelf of the fridge, and spun around to confront him. His deeply
lined face was unreadable.
"Charlie won't be back for a long time." My voice was almost rude.
He nodded in agreement, but said nothing.
"Thanks again for the fish fry," I hinted.
He continued nodding. I sighed and folded my arms across my chest.
He seemed to sense that I had given up on small talk. "Bella," he said, and then he hesitated.
I waited.
"Bella," he said again, "Charlie is one of my best friends."
"Yes."
He spoke each word carefully in his rumbling voice. "I noticed you've been spending time with one of the
Cullens."
"Yes," I repeated curtly.
His eyes narrowed. "Maybe it's none of my business, but I don't think that is such a good idea."
"You're right," I agreed. "It is none of your business."
He raised his graying eyebrows at my tone. "You probably don't know this, but the Cullen family has an
unpleasant reputation on the reservation."
"Actually, I did know that," I informed him in a hard voice. This surprised him. "But that reputation
couldn't be deserved, could it? Because the Cullens never set foot on the reservation, do they?" I could
see that my less than subtle reminder of the agreement that both bound and protected his tribe pulled him
up short.
"That's true," he acceded, his eyes guarded. "You seem… well informed about the Cullens. More
informed than I expected."
I stared him down. "Maybe even better informed than you are."
He pursed his thick lips as he considered that. "Maybe." he allowed, but his eyes were shrewd. "Is
Charlie as well informed?"

He had found the weak chink in my armor.
"Charlie likes the Cullens a lot," I hedged. He clearly understood my evasion. His expression was
unhappy, but unsurprised.
"It's not my business," he said. "But it may be Charlie's."
"Though it would be my business, again, whether or not I think that it's Charlie's business, right?"
I wondered if he even understood my confused question as I struggled not to say anything compromising.
But he seemed to. He thought about it while the rain picked up against the roof, the only sound breaking
the silence.
"Yes," he finally surrendered. "I guess that's your business, too."
I sighed with relief. "Thanks, Billy."
"Just think about what you're doing, Bella," he urged.
"Okay," I agreed quickly.
He frowned. "What I meant to say was, don't do what you're doing."
I looked into his eyes, filled with nothing but concern for me, and there was nothing I could say.
Just then the front door banged loudly, and I jumped at the sound.
"There's no picture anywhere in that car." Jacob's complaining voice reached us before he did. The
shoulders of his shirt were stained with the rain, his hair dripping, when he rounded the corner.
"Hmm," Billy grunted, suddenly detached, spinning his chair around to face his son. "I guess I left it at
home."
Jacob rolled his eyes dramatically. "Great."
"Well, Bella, tell Charlie" — Billy paused before continuing — "that we stopped by, I mean."
"I will," I muttered.
Jacob was surprised. "Are we leaving already?"
"Charlie's gonna be out late," Billy explained as he rolled himself past Jacob.
"Oh." Jacob looked disappointed. "Well, I guess I'll see you later, then, Bella."
"Sure," I agreed.
"Take care," Billy warned me. I didn't answer.
Jacob helped his father out the door. I waved briefly, glancing swiftly toward my now-empty truck, and
then shut the door before they were gone.
I stood in the hallway for a minute, listening to the sound of their car as it backed out and drove away. I
stayed where I was, waiting for the irritation and anxiety to subside. When the tension eventually faded a
bit, I headed upstairs to change out of my dressy clothes.

I tried on a couple of different tops, not sure what to expect tonight. As I concentrated on what was
coming, what had just passed became insignificant. Now that I was removed from Jasper's and Edward's
influence, I began to make up for not being terrified before. I gave up quickly on choosing an outfit —
throwing on an old flannel shirt and jeans — knowing I would be in my raincoat all night anyway.
The phone rang and I sprinted downstairs to get it. There was only one voice I wanted to hear; anything
else would be a disappointment. But I knew that if he wanted to talk to me, he'd probably just
materialize in my room.
"Hello?" I asked, breathless.
"Bella? It's me," Jessica said.
"Oh, hey, Jess." I scrambled for a moment to come back down to reality. It felt like months rather than
days since I'd spoken to Jess. "How was the dance?"
"It was so much fun!" Jessica gushed. Needing no more invitation than that, she launched into a
minute-by-minute account of the previous night. I mmm'd and ahh'd at the right places, but it wasn't easy
to concentrate. Jessica, Mike, the dance, the school — they all seemed strangely irrelevant at the
moment. My eyes kept flashing to the window, trying to judge the degree of light behind the heavy
clouds.
"Did you hear what I said, Bella?" Jess asked, irritated.
"I'm sorry, what?"
"I said, Mike kissed me! Can you believe it?"
"That's wonderful, Jess," I said.
"So what did you do yesterday?" Jessica challenged, still sounding bothered by my lack of attention. Or
maybe she was upset because I hadn't asked for details.
"Nothing, really. I just hung around outside to enjoy the sun."
I heard Charlie's car in the garage.
"Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?"
The front door slammed and I could hear Charlie banging around under the stairs, putting his tackle
away.
"Um." I hesitated, not sure what my story was anymore.
"Hi there, kiddo!" Charlie called as he walked into the kitchen. I waved at him.
Jess heard his voice. "Oh, your dad's there. Never mind — we'll talk tomorrow. See you in Trig."
"See ya, Jess." I hung up the phone.
"Hey, Dad," I said. He was scrubbing his hands in the sink. "Where's the fish?"
"I put it out in the freezer."
"I'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze — Billy dropped off some of Harry Clearwater's fish fry this

afternoon." I worked to sound enthusiastic.
"He did?" Charlie's eyes lit up. "That's my favorite."
Charlie cleaned up while I got dinner ready. It didn't take long till we were sitting at the table, eating in
silence. Charlie was enjoying his food. I was wondering desperately how to fulfill my assignment,
struggling to think of a way to broach the subject.
"What did you do with yourself today?" he asked, snapping me out of my reverie.
"Well, this afternoon I just hung out around the house…" Only the very recent part of this afternoon,
actually. I tried to keep my voice upbeat, but my stomach was hollow. "And this morning I was over at
the Cullens'."
Charlie dropped his fork.
"Dr. Cullen's place?" he asked in astonishment.
I pretended not to notice his reaction. "Yeah."
"What were you doing there?" He hadn't picked his fork back up.
"Well, I sort of have a date with Edward Cullen tonight, and he wanted to introduce me to his parents…
Dad?"
It appeared that Charlie was having an aneurysm.
"Dad, are you all right?"
"You are going out with Edward Cullen?" he thundered.
Uh-oh. "I thought you liked the Cullens."
"He's too old for you," he ranted.
"We're both juniors," I corrected, though he was more right than he dreamed.
"Wait…" He paused. "Which one is Edwin?"
"Edward is the youngest, the one with the reddish brown hair." The beautiful one, the godlike one…
"Oh, well, that's" — he struggled — "better, I guess. I don't like the look of that big one. I'm sure he's a
nice boy and all, but he looks too… mature for you. Is this Edwin your boyfriend?"
"It's Edward, Dad."
"Is he?"
"Sort of, I guess."
"You said last night that you weren't interested in any of the boys in town." But he picked up his fork
again, so I could see the worst was over.
"Well, Edward doesn't live in town, Dad."
He gave me a disparaging look as he chewed.

"And, anyways," I continued, "it's kind of at an early stage, you know. Don't embarrass me with all the
boyfriend talk, okay?"
"When is he coming over?"
"He'll be here in a few minutes."
"Where is he taking you?"
I groaned loudly. "I hope you're getting the Spanish Inquisition out of your system now. We're going to
play baseball with his family."
His face puckered, and then he finally chuckled. "You're playing baseball?"
"Well, I'll probably watch most of the time."
"You must really like this guy," he observed suspiciously.
I sighed and rolled my eyes for his benefit.
I heard the roar of an engine pull up in front of the house. I jumped up and started cleaning my dishes.
"Leave the dishes, I can do them tonight. You baby me too much."
The doorbell rang, and Charlie stalked off to answer it. I was half a step behind him.
I hadn't realized how hard it was pouring outside. Edward stood in the halo of the porch light, looking
like a male model in an advertisement for raincoats.
"Come on in, Edward."
I breathed a sigh of relief when Charlie got his name right.
"Thanks, Chief Swan," Edward said in a respectful voice.
"Go ahead and call me Charlie. Here, I'll take your jacket."
"Thanks, sir."
"Have a seat there, Edward."
I grimaced.
Edward sat down fluidly in the only chair, forcing me to sit next to Chief Swan on the sofa. I quickly shot
him a dirty look. He winked behind Charlie's back.
"So I hear you're getting my girl to watch baseball." Only in Washington would the fact that it was raining
buckets have no bearing at all on the playing of outdoor sports.
"Yes, sir, that's the plan." He didn't look surprised that I'd told my father the truth. He might have been
listening, though.
"Well, more power to you, I guess."
Charlie laughed, and Edward joined in.

"Okay." I stood up. "Enough humor at my expense. Let's go." I walked back to the hall and pulled on my
jacket. They followed.
"Not too late, Bell."
"Don't worry, Charlie, I'll have her home early," Edward promised.
"You take care of my girl, all right?"
I groaned, but they ignored me.
"She'll be safe with me, I promise, sir."
Charlie couldn't doubt Edward's sincerity, it rang in every word.
I stalked out. They both laughed, and Edward followed me.
I stopped dead on the porch. There, behind my truck, was a monster Jeep. Its tires were higher than my
waist. There were metal guards over the headlights and tail-lights, and four large spotlights attached to the
crash bar. The hardtop was shiny red.
Charlie let out a low whistle.
"Wear your seat belts," he choked out.
Edward followed me around to my side and opened the door. I gauged the distance to the seat and
prepared to jump for it. He sighed, and then lifted me in with one hand. I hoped Charlie didn't notice.
As he went around to the driver's side, at a normal, human pace, I tried to put on my seat belt. But there
were too many buckles.
"What's all this?" I asked when he opened the door.
"It's an off-roading harness."
"Uh-oh."
I tried to find the right places for all the buckles to fit, but it wasn't going too quickly. He sighed again and
reached over to help me. I was glad that the rain was too heavy to see Charlie clearly on the porch. That
meant he couldn't see how Edward's hands lingered at my neck, brushed along my collarbones. I gave up
trying to help him and focused on not hyperventilating.
Edward turned the key and the engine roared to life. We pulled away from the house.
"This is a… um… big Jeep you have."
"It's Emmett's. I didn't think you'd want to run the whole way."
"Where do you keep this thing?"
"We remodeled one of the outbuildings into a garage."
"Aren't you going to put on your seat belt?"
He threw me a disbelieving look.

And Emmett secured my hands in his steely grasp.
"No! Edward! No, you can't do this."
"I have to, Bella, now please be quiet."
"I won't! You have to take me back — Charlie will call the FBI! They'll be all over your family —
Carlisle and Esme! They'll have to leave, to hide forever!"
"Calm down, Bella." His voice was cold. "We've been there before."
"Not over me, you don't! You're not ruining everything over me!" I struggled violently, with total futility.
Alice spoke for the first time. "Edward, pull over."
He flashed her a hard look, and then sped up.
"Edward, let's just talk this through."
"You don't understand," he roared in frustration. I'd never heard his voice so loud; it was deafening in the
confines of the Jeep. The speedometer neared one hundred and fifteen. "He's a tracker, Alice, did you
see that? He's a tracker!"
I felt Emmett stiffen next to me, and I wondered at his reaction to the word. It meant something more to
the three of them than it did to me; I wanted to understand, but there was no opening for me to ask.
"Pull over, Edward." Alice's tone was reasonable, but there was a ring of authority in it I'd never heard
before.
The speedometer inched passed one-twenty.
"Do it, Edward."
"Listen to me, Alice. I saw his mind. Tracking is his passion, his obsession — and he wants her, Alice —
her, specifically. He begins the hunt tonight."
"He doesn't know where —"
He interrupted her. "How long do you think it will take him to cross her scent in town? His plan was
already set before the words were out of Laurent's mouth."
I gasped, knowing where my scent would lead. "Charlie! You can't leave him there! You can't leave
him!" I thrashed against the harness.
"She's right," Alice said.
The car slowed slightly.
"Let's just look at our options for a minute," Alice coaxed.
The car slowed again, more noticeably, and then suddenly we screeched to a stop on the shoulder of the
highway. I flew against the harness, and then slammed back into the seat.
"There are no options," Edward hissed.
"I'm not leaving Charlie!" I yelled.

He ignored me completely.
"We have to take her back," Emmett finally spoke.
"No." Edward was absolute.
"He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to touch her."
"He'll wait."
Emmett smiled. "I can wait, too."
"You didn't see — you don't understand. Once he commits to a hunt, he's unshakable. We'd have to kill
him."
Emmett didn't seem upset by the idea. "That's an option."
"And the female. She's with him. If it turns into a fight, the leader will go with them, too."
"There are enough of us."
"There's another option," Alice said quietly.
Edward turned on her in fury, his voice a blistering snarl. "There — is — no — other — option!"
Emmett and I both stared at him in shock, but Alice seemed unsurprised. The silence lasted for a long
minute as Edward and Alice stared each other down.
I broke it. "Does anyone want to hear my plan?"
"No," Edward growled. Alice glared at him, finally provoked.
"Listen," I pleaded. "You take me back."
"No," he interrupted.
I glared at him and continued. "You take me back. I tell my dad I want to go home to Phoenix. I pack
my bags. We wait till this tracker is watching, and then we run. He'll follow us and leave Charlie alone.
Charlie won't call the FBI on your family. Then you can take me any damned place you want."
They stared at me, stunned.
"It's not a bad idea, really." Emmett's surprise was definitely an insult.
"It might work — and we simply can't leave her father unprotected. You know that," Alice said.
Everyone looked at Edward.
"It's too dangerous — I don't want him within a hundred miles of her."
Emmett was supremely confident. "Edward, he's not getting through us."
Alice thought for a minute. "I don't see him attacking. He'll try to wait for us to leave her alone."
"It won't take long for him to realize that's not going to happen."
"I demand that you take me home." I tried to sound firm.

Edward pressed his fingers to his temples and squeezed his eyes shut.
"Please," I said in a much smaller voice.
He didn't look up. When he spoke, his voice sounded worn.
"You're leaving tonight, whether the tracker sees or not. You tell Charlie that you can't stand another
minute in Forks. Tell him whatever story works. Pack the first things your hands touch, and then get in
your truck. I don't care what he says to you. You have fifteen minutes. Do you hear me? Fifteen minutes
from the time you cross the doorstep."
The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer
started to race up the dial.
"Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands.
"Oh, sorry." He let me loose.
A few minutes passed in silence, other than the roar of the engine. Then Edward spoke again.
"This is how it's going to happen. When we get to the house, if the tracker is not there, I will walk her to
the door. Then she has fifteen minutes." He glared at me in the rearview mirror. "Emmett, you take the
outside of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as she is. After she's out, you two can
take the Jeep home and tell Carlisle."
"No way," Emmett broke in. "I'm with you."
"Think it through, Emmett. I don't know how long I'll be gone."
"Until we know how far this is going to go, I'm with you."
Edward sighed. "If the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving."
"We're going to make it there before him," Alice said confidently.
Edward seemed to accept that. Whatever his problem with Alice was, he didn't doubt her now.
"What are we going to do with the Jeep?" she asked.
His voice had a hard edge. "You're driving it home."
"No, I'm not," she said calmly.
The unintelligible stream of profanities started again.
"We can't all fit in my truck," I whispered.
Edward didn't appear to hear me.
"I think you should let me go alone," I said even more quietly.
He heard that.
"Bella, please just do this my way, just this once," he said between clenched teeth.
"Listen, Charlie's not an imbecile," I protested. "If you're not in town tomorrow, he's going to get

suspicious."
"That's irrelevant. We'll make sure he's safe, and that's all that matters."
"Then what about this tracker? He saw the way you acted tonight. He's going to think you're with me,
wherever you are."
Emmett looked at me, insultingly surprised again. "Edward, listen to her," he urged. "I think she's right."
"Yes, she is," Alice agreed.
"I can't do that." Edward's voice was icy.
"Emmett should stay, too," I continued. "He definitely got an eyeful of Emmett."
"What?" Emmett turned on me.
"You'll get a better crack at him if you stay," Alice agreed.
Edward stared at her incredulously. "You think I should let her go alone?"
"Of course not," Alice said. "Jasper and I will take her."
"I can't do that," Edward repeated, but this time there was a trace of defeat in his voice. The logic was
working on him.
I tried to be persuasive. "Hang out here for a week —" I saw his expression in the mirror and amended
"— a few days. Let Charlie see you haven't kidnapped me, and lead this James on a wild-goose chase.
Make sure he's completely off my trail. Then come and meet me. Take a roundabout route, of course,
and then Jasper and Alice can go home."
I could see him beginning to consider it.
"Meet you where?"
"Phoenix." Of course.
"No. He'll hear that's where you're going," he said impatiently.
"And you'll make it look like that's a ruse, obviously. He'll know that we'll know that he's listening. He'll
never believe I'm actually going where I say I am going."
"She's diabolical," Emmett chuckled.
"And if that doesn't work?"
"There are several million people in Phoenix," I informed him.
"It's not that hard to find a phone book."
"I won't go home."
"Oh?" he inquired, a dangerous note in his voice.
"I'm quite old enough to get my own place."

"Edward, we'll be with her," Alice reminded him.
"What are you going to do in Phoenix?" he asked her scathingly.
"Stay indoors."
"I kind of like it." Emmett was thinking about cornering James, no doubt.
"Shut up, Emmett."
"Look, if we try to take him down while she's still around, there's a much better chance that someone
will get hurt — she'll get hurt, or you will, trying to protect her. Now, if we get him alone…" He trailed
off with a slow smile. I was right.
The Jeep was crawling slowly along now as we drove into town. Despite my brave talk, I could feel the
hairs on my arms standing up. I thought about Charlie, alone in the house, and tried to be courageous.
"Bella." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything
happen to yourself— anything at all — I'm holding you personally responsible. Do you understand that?"
"Yes," I gulped.
He turned to Alice.
"Can Jasper handle this?"
"Give him some credit, Edward. He's been doing very, very well, all things considered."
"Can you handle this?" he asked.
And graceful little Alice pulled back her lips in a horrific grimace and let loose with a guttural snarl that
had me cowering against the seat in terror.
Edward smiled at her. "But keep your opinions to yourself," he muttered suddenly.

Charlie was waiting up for me. All the house lights were on. My mind was blank as I tried to think of a
way to make him let me go. This wasn't going to be pleasant.
Edward pulled up slowly, staying well back from my truck. All three of them were acutely alert, ramrod
straight in their seats, listening to every sound of the wood, looking through every shadow, catching every
scent, searching for something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to
listen.
"He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me get out of the harness.
"Don't worry, Bella," he said in a low but cheerful voice, "we'll take care of things here quickly."
I felt moisture filling up my eyes as I looked at Emmett. I barely knew him, and yet, somehow, not
knowing when I would see him again after tonight was anguishing. I knew this was just a faint taste of the
goodbyes I would have to survive in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill.

"Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was a command. They slithered soundlessly into the darkness, instantly
disappearing. Edward opened my door and took my hand, then drew me into the protecting enclosure of
his arm. He walked me swiftly toward the house, eyes always roving through the night.
"Fifteen minutes," he warned under his breath.
"I can do this." I sniffled. My tears had given me an inspiration.
I stopped on the porch and took hold of his face in my hands. I looked fiercely into his eyes.
"I love you," I said in a low, intense voice. "I will always love you, no matter what happens now."
"Nothing is going to happen to you, Bella," he said just as fiercely.
"Just follow the plan, okay? Keep Charlie safe for me. He's not going to like me very much after this, and
I want to have the chance to apologize later."
"Get inside, Bella. We have to hurry." His voice was urgent.
"One more thing," I whispered passionately. "Don't listen to another word I say tonight!" He was leaning
in, and so all I had to do was stretch up on my toes to kiss his surprised, frozen lips with as much force
as I was capable of. Then I turned and kicked the door open.
"Go away, Edward!" I yelled at him, running inside and slamming the door shut in his still-shocked face.
"Bella?" Charlie had been hovering in the living room, and he was already on his feet.
"Leave me alone!" I screamed at him through my tears, which were flowing relentlessly now. I ran up the
stairs to my room, throwing the door shut and locking it. I ran to my bed, flinging myself on the floor to
retrieve my duffel bag. I reached swiftly between the mattress and box spring to grab the knotted old
sock that contained my secret cash hoard.
Charlie was pounding on my door.
"Bella, are you okay? What's going on?" His voice was frightened.
"I'm going borne," I shouted, my voice breaking in the perfect spot.
"Did he hurt you?" His tone edged toward anger.
"No!" I shrieked a few octaves higher. I turned to my dresser, and Edward was already there, silently
yanking out armfuls of random clothes, which he proceeded to throw to me.
"Did he break up with you?" Charlie was perplexed.
"No!" I yelled, slightly more breathless as I shoved everything into the bag. Edward threw another
drawer's contents at me. The bag was pretty much full now.
"What happened, Bella?" Charlie shouted through the door, pounding again.
"I broke up with him!" I shouted back, jerking on the zipper of my bag. Edward's capable hands pushed
mine away and zipped it smoothly. He put the strap carefully over my arm.
"I'll be in the truck — go!" he whispered, and pushed me toward the door. He vanished out the window.
I unlocked the door and pushed past Charlie roughly, struggling with my heavy bag as I ran down the

stairs.
"What happened?" he yelled. He was right behind me. "I thought you liked him."
He caught my elbow in the kitchen. Though he was still bewildered, his grip was firm.
He spun me around to look at him, and I could see in his face that he had no intention of letting me leave.
I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that I hated myself for even
considering it. But I had no time, and I had to keep him safe.
I glared up at my father, fresh tears in my eyes for what I was about to do.
"I do like him — that's the problem. I can't do this anymore! I can't put down any more roots here! I
don't want to end up trapped in this stupid, boring town like Mom! I'm not going to make the same dumb
mistake she did. I hate it — I can't stay here another minute!"
His hand dropped from my arm like I'd electrocuted him. I turned away from his shocked, wounded face
and headed for the door.
"Bells, you can't leave now. It's nighttime," he whispered behind me.
I didn't turn around. "I'll sleep in the truck if I get tired."
"Just wait another week," he pled, still shell-shocked. "Renée will be back by then."
This completely derailed me. "What?"
Charlie continued eagerly, almost babbling with relief as I hesitated. "She called while you were out.
Things aren't going so well in Florida, and if Phil doesn't get signed by the end of the week, they're going
back to Arizona. The assistant coach of the Sidewinders said they might have a spot for another
shortstop."
I shook my head, trying to reassemble my now-confused thoughts. Every passing second put Charlie in
more danger.
"I have a key," I muttered, turning the knob. He was too close, one hand extended toward me, his face
dazed. I couldn't lose any more time arguing with him. I was going to have to hurt him further.
"Just let me go, Charlie." I repeated my mother's last words as she'd walked out this same door so many
years ago. I said them as angrily as I could manage, and I threw the door open. "It didn't work out,
okay? I really, really hate Forks!"
My cruel words did their job — Charlie stayed frozen on the doorstep, stunned, while I ran into the
night. I was hideously frightened of the empty yard. I ran wildly for the truck, visualizing a dark shadow
behind me. I threw my bag in the bed and wrenched the door open. The key was waiting in the ignition.
"I'll call you tomorrow!" I yelled, wishing more than anything that I could explain everything to him right
then, knowing I would never be able to. I gunned the engine and peeled out.
Edward reached for my hand.
"Pull over," he said as the house, and Charlie, disappeared behind us.
"I can drive," I said through the tears pouring down my cheeks.

His long hands unexpectedly gripped my waist, and his foot pushed mine off the gas pedal. He pulled me
across his lap, wrenching my hands free of the wheel, and suddenly he was in the driver's seat. The truck
didn't swerve an inch.
"You wouldn't be able to find the house," he explained.
Lights flared suddenly behind us. I stared out the back window, eyes wide with horror.
"It's just Alice," he reassured me. He took my hand again.
My mind was filled with the image of Charlie in the doorway. "The tracker?"
"He heard the end of your performance," Edward said grimly.
"Charlie?" I asked in dread.
"The tracker followed us. He's running behind us now."
My body went cold.
"Can we outrun him?"
"No." But he sped up as he spoke. The truck's engine whined in protest.
My plan suddenly didn't feel so brilliant anymore.
I was staring back at Alice's headlights when the truck shuddered and a dark shadow sprung up outside
the window.
My bloodcurdling scream lasted a fraction of a second before Edward's hand clamped down on my
mouth.
"It's Emmett!"
He released my mouth, and wound his arm around my waist.
"It's okay, Bella," he promised. "You're going to be safe."
We raced through the quiet town toward the north highway.
"I didn't realize you were still so bored with small-town life," he said conversationally, and I knew he was
trying to distract me. "It seemed like you were adjusting fairly well — especially recently. Maybe I was
just flattering myself that I was making life more interesting for you."
"I wasn't being nice," I confessed, ignoring his attempt at diversion, looking down at my knees. "That was
the same thing my mom said when she left him. You could say I was hitting below the belt."
"Don't worry. He'll forgive you." He smiled a little, though it didn't touch his eyes.
I stared at him desperately, and he saw the naked panic in my eyes.
"Bella, it's going to be all right."
"But it won't be all right when I'm not with you," I whispered.
"We'll be together again in a few days," he said, tightening his arm around me. "Don't forget that this was

When I woke up I was confused. My thoughts were hazy, still twisted up in dreams and nightmares; it
took me longer than it should have to realize where I was.
This room was too bland to belong anywhere but in a hotel. The bedside lamps, bolted to the tables,
were a dead giveaway, as were the long drapes made from the same fabric as the bedspread, and the
generic watercolor prints on the walls.
I tried to remember how I got here, but nothing came at first.
I did remember the sleek black car, the glass in the windows darker than that on a limousine. The engine
was almost silent, though we'd raced across the black freeways at more than twice the legal speed.
And I remembered Alice sitting with me on the dark leather backseat. Somehow, during the long night,
my head had ended up against her granite neck. My closeness didn't seem to bother her at all, and her
cool, hard skin was oddly comforting to me. The front of her thin cotton shirt was cold, damp with the
tears that streamed from my eyes until, red and sore, they ran dry.
Sleep had evaded me; my aching eyes strained open even though the night finally ended and dawn broke
over a low peak somewhere in California. The gray light, streaking across the cloudless sky, stung my
eyes. But I couldn't close them; when I did, the images that flashed all too vividly, like still slides behind
my lids, were unbearable. Charlie's broken expression — Edward's brutal snarl, teeth bared — Rosalie's
resentful glare — the keen-eyed scrutiny of the tracker — the dead look in Edward's eyes after he
kissed me the last time… I couldn't stand to see them. So I fought against my weariness and the sun rose
higher.
I was still awake when we came through a shallow mountain pass and the sun, behind us now, reflected
off the tiled rooftops of the Valley of the Sun. I didn't have enough emotion left to be surprised that we'd
made a three-day journey in one. I stared blankly at the wide, flat expanse laid out in front of me.
Phoenix — the palm trees, the scrubby creosote, the haphazard lines of the intersecting freeways, the
green swaths of golf courses and turquoise splotches of swimming pools, all submerged in a thin smog
and embraced by the short, rocky ridges that weren't really big enough to be called mountains.

and wait till we find him again."
"I'll be fine. Is Esme with Charlie?"
"Yes — the female has been in town. She went to the house, but while Charlie was at work. She hasn't
gone near him, so don't be afraid. He's safe with Esme and Rosalie watching."
"What is she doing?"
"Probably trying to pick up the trail. She's been all through the town during the night. Rosalie traced her
through the airport, all the roads around town, the school… she's digging, Bella, but there's nothing to
find."
"And you're sure Charlie's safe?"
"Yes, Esme won't let him out of her sight. And we'll be there soon. If the tracker gets anywhere near
Forks, we'll have him."
"I miss you," I whispered.
"I know, Bella. Believe me, I know. It's like you've taken half my self away with you."
"Come and get it, then," I challenged.
"Soon, as soon as I possibly can. I will make you safe first." His voice was hard.
"I love you," I reminded him.
"Could you believe that, despite everything I've put you through, I love you, too?"
"Yes, I can, actually."
"I'll come for you soon."
"I'll be waiting."
As soon as the phone went dead, the cloud of depression began to creep over me again.
I turned to give the phone back to Alice and found her and Jasper bent over the table, where Alice was
sketching on a piece of hotel stationery. I leaned on the back of the couch, looking over her shoulder.
She drew a room: long, rectangular, with a thinner, square section at the back. The wooden planks that
made up the floor stretched lengthwise across the room. Down the walls were lines denoting the breaks
in the mirrors. And then, wrapping around the walls, waist high, a long band. The band Alice said was
gold.
"It's a ballet studio," I said, suddenly recognizing the familiar shapes.
They looked at me, surprised.
"Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was an undercurrent of something I
couldn't identify. Alice bent her head to her work, her hand flying across the page now, the shape of an
emergency exit taking shape against the back wall, the stereo and TV on a low table by the front right
corner.
"It looks like a place I used to go for dance lessons — when I was eight or nine. It was shaped just the

same." I touched the page where the square section jutted out, narrowing the back part of the room.
"That's where the bathrooms were — the doors were through the other dance floor. But the stereo was
here" — I pointed to the left corner — "it was older, and there wasn't a TV. There was a window in the
waiting room — you would see the room from this perspective if you looked through it."
Alice and Jasper were staring at me.
"Are you sure it's the same room?" Jasper asked, still calm.
"No, not at all — I suppose most dance studios would look the same — the mirrors, the bar." I traced
my finger along the ballet bar set against the mirrors. "It's just the shape that looked familiar." I touched
the door, set in exactly the same place as the one I remembered.
"Would you have any reason to go there now?" Alice asked, breaking my reverie.
"No, I haven't been there in almost ten years. I was a terrible dancer — they always put me in the back
for recitals," I admitted.
"So there's no way it could be connected with you?" Alice asked intently.
"No, I don't even think the same person owns it. I'm sure it's just another dance studio, somewhere."
"Where was the studio you went to?" Jasper asked in a casual voice.
"It was just around the corner from my mom's house. I used to walk there after school…" I said, my
voice trailing off. I didn't miss the look they exchanged.
"Here in Phoenix, then?" His voice was still casual.
"Yes," I whispered. "Fifty-eighth Street and Cactus."
We all sat in silence, staring at the drawing.
"Alice, is that phone safe?"
"Yes," she reassured me. "The number would just trace back to Washington."
"Then I can use it to call my mom."
"I thought she was in Florida."
"She is — but she's coming home soon, and she can't come back to that house while…" My voice
trembled. I was thinking about something Edward had said, about the red-haired female at Charlie's
house, at the school, where my records would be.
"How will you reach her?"
"They don't have a permanent number except at the house — she's supposed to check her messages
regularly."
"Jasper?" Alice asked.
He thought about it. "I don't think there's any way it could hurt — be sure you don't say where you are,
of course."
I reached eagerly for the phone and dialed the familiar number. It rang four times, and then I heard my

mom's breezy voice telling me to leave a message.
"Mom," I said after the beep, "it's me. Listen, I need you to do something. It's important. As soon as you
get this message, call me at this number." Alice was already at my side, writing the number for me on the
bottom of her picture. I read it carefully, twice. "Please don't go anywhere until you talk to me. Don't
worry, I'm okay, but I have to talk to you right away, no matter how late you get this call, all right? I love
you, Mom. Bye." I closed my eyes and prayed with all my might that no unforeseen change of plans
would bring her home before she got my message.
I settled into the sofa, nibbling on a plate of leftover fruit, anticipating a long evening. I thought about
calling Charlie, but I wasn't sure if I should be home by now or not. I concentrated on the news, watching
out for stories about Florida, or about spring training — strikes or hurricanes or terrorist attacks —
anything that might send them home early.
Immortality must grant endless patience. Neither Jasper nor Alice seemed to feel the need to do anything
at all. For a while, Alice sketched the vague outline of the dark room from her vision, as much as she
could see in the light from the TV. But when she was done, she simply sat, looking at the blank walls with
her timeless eyes. Jasper, too, seemed to have no urge to pace, or peek through the curtains, or run
screaming out the door, the way I did.
I must have fallen asleep on the couch, waiting for the phone to ring again. The touch of Alice's cold
hands woke me briefly as she carried me to the bed, but I was unconscious again before my head hit the
pillow.

His voice was courteous, kind.
And suddenly it hit me. My mother was safe. She was still in Florida. She'd never gotten my message.
She'd never been terrified by the dark red eyes in the abnormally pale face before me. She was safe.
"Yes," I answered, my voice saturated with relief.
"You don't sound angry that I tricked you."
"I'm not." My sudden high made me brave. What did it matter now? It would soon be over. Charlie and
Mom would never be harmed, would never have to fear. I felt almost giddy. Some analytical part of my
mind warned me that I was dangerously close to snapping from the stress.
"How odd. You really mean it." His dark eyes assessed me with interest. The irises were nearly black,
just a hint of ruby around the edges. Thirsty. "I will give your strange coven this much, you humans can be
quite interesting. I guess I can see the draw of observing you. It's amazing — some of you seem to have
no sense of your own self-interest at all."
He was standing a few feet away from me, arms folded, looking at me curiously. There was no menace in
his face or stance. He was so very average-looking, nothing remarkable about his face or body at all.
Just the white skin, the circled eyes I'd grown so used to. He wore a pale blue, long-sleeved shirt and
faded blue jeans.
"I suppose you're going to tell me that your boyfriend will avenge you?" he asked, hopefully it seemed to
me.
"No, I don't think so. At least, I asked him not to."
"And what was his reply to that?"
"I don't know." It was strangely easy to converse with this genteel hunter. "I left him a letter."
"How romantic, a last letter. And do you think he will honor it?" His voice was just a little harder now, a
hint of sarcasm marring his polite tone.
"I hope so."
"Hmmm. Well, our hopes differ then. You see, this was all just a little too easy, too quick. To be quite
honest, I'm disappointed. I expected a much greater challenge. And, after all, I only needed a little luck."
I waited in silence.
"When Victoria couldn't get to your father, I had her find out more about you. There was no sense in
running all over the planet chasing you down when I could comfortably wait for you in a place of my
choosing. So, after I talked to Victoria, I decided to come to Phoenix to pay your mother a visit. I'd
heard you say you were going home. At first, I never dreamed you meant it. But then I wondered.
Humans can be very predictable; they like to be somewhere familiar, somewhere safe. And wouldn't it be
the perfect ploy, to go to the last place you should be when you're hiding — the place that you said you'd
be.
"But of course I wasn't sure, it was just a hunch. I usually get a feeling about the prey that I'm hunting, a
sixth sense, if you will. I listened to your message when I got to your mother's house, but of course I
couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very useful to have your number, but you could have
been in Antarctica for all I knew, and the game wouldn't work unless you were close by.

My eyes opened to a bright, white light. I was in an unfamiliar room, a white room. The wall beside me
was covered in long vertical blinds; over my head, the glaring lights blinded me. I was propped up on a
hard, uneven bed — a bed with rails. The pillows were flat and lumpy. There was an annoying beeping
sound somewhere close by. I hoped that meant I was still alive. Death shouldn't be this uncomfortable.
My hands were all twisted up with clear tubes, and something was taped across my face, under my nose.
I lifted my hand to rip it off.
"No, you don't." And cool fingers caught my hand.
"Edward?" I turned my head slightly, and his exquisite face was just inches from mine, his chin resting on
the edge of my pillow. I realized again that I was alive, this time with gratitude and elation. "Oh, Edward,
I'm so sorry!"
"Shhhh," he shushed me. "Everything's all right now."
"What happened?" I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind rebelled against me as I tried to recall.
"I was almost too late. I could have been too late," he whispered, his voice tormented.
"I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he had my mom."
"He tricked us all."
"I need to call Charlie and my mom," I realized through the haze.

the cold, but now Jacksonville! It's always sunny, and the humidity really isn't that bad. We found the
cutest house, yellow, with white trim, and a porch just like in an old movie, and this huge oak tree, and
it's just a few minutes from the ocean, and you'll have your own bathroom —"
"Wait, Mom!" I interrupted. Edward still had his eyes closed, but he looked too tense to pass as asleep.
"What are you talking about? I'm not going to Florida. I live in Forks."
"But you don't have to anymore, silly," she laughed. "Phil will be able to be around so much more now…
we've talked about it a lot, and what I'm going to do is trade off on the away games, half the time with
you, half the time with him."
"Mom." I hesitated, wondering how best to be diplomatic about this. "I want to live in Forks. I'm already
settled in at school, and I have a couple of girlfriends" — she glanced toward Edward again when I
reminded her of friends, so I tried another direction — "and Charlie needs me. He's just all alone up
there, and he can't cook at all."
"You want to stay in Forks?" she asked, bewildered. The idea was inconceivable to her. And then her
eyes flickered back toward Edward. "Why?"
"I told you — school, Charlie — ouch!" I'd shrugged. Not a good idea.
Her hands fluttered helplessly over me, trying to find a safe place to pat. She made do with my forehead;
it was unbandaged.
"Bella, honey, you hate Forks," she reminded me.
"It's not so bad."
She frowned and looked back and forth between Edward and me, this time very deliberately.
"Is it this boy?" she whispered.
I opened my mouth to lie, but her eyes were scrutinizing my face, and I knew she would see through that.
"He's part of it," I admitted. No need to confess how big a part. "So, have you had a chance to talk with
Edward?" I asked.
"Yes." She hesitated, looking at his perfectly still form. "And I want to talk to you about that."
Uh-oh. "What about?" I asked.
"I think that boy is in love with you," she accused, keeping her voice low.
"I think so, too," I confided.
"And how do you feel about him?" She only poorly concealed the raging curiosity in her voice.
I sighed, looking away. As much as I loved my mom, this was not a conversation I wanted to have with
her. "I'm pretty crazy about him." There — that sounded like something a teenager with her first
boyfriend might say.
"Well, he seems very nice, and, my goodness, he's incredibly good-looking, but you're so young,
Bella…" Her voice was unsure; as far as I could remember, this was the first time since I was eight that
she'd come close to trying to sound like a parental authority. I recognized the reasonable-but-firm tone of
voice from talks I'd had with her about men.

"It's not an issue. Three days. Big deal."
Edward grimaced again as my words reminded him that I was more informed than he had ever intended
me to be. I watched him repress the anger, watched as his eyes grew speculative.
"Charlie?" he asked curtly. "Renée?"
Minutes passed in silence as I struggled to answer his question. I opened my mouth, but no sound came
out. I closed it again. He waited, and his expression became triumphant because he knew I had no true
answer.
"Look, that's not an issue either," I finally muttered; my voice was as unconvincing as it always was when
I lied. "Renée has always made the choices that work for her — she'd want me to do the same. And
Charlie's resilient, he's used to being on his own. I can't take care of them forever. I have my own life to
live."
"Exactly," he snapped. "And I won't end it for you."
"If you're waiting for me to be on my deathbed, I've got news for you! I was just there!"
"You're going to recover," he reminded me.
I took a deep breath to calm myself, ignoring the spasm of pain it triggered. I stared at him, and he stared
back. There was no compromise in his face.
"No," I said slowly. "I'm not."
His forehead creased. "Of course you are. You may have a scar or two…"
"You're wrong," I insisted. "I'm going to die."
"Really, Bella." He was anxious now. "You'll be out of here in a few days. Two week at most."
I glared at him. "I may not die now… but I'm going to die sometime. Every minute of the day, I get
closer. And I'm going to get old."
He frowned as what I was saying sunk in, pressing his long fingers to his temples and closing his eyes.
"That's how it's supposed to happen. How it should happen. How it would have happened if I didn't exist
— and I shouldn't exist."
I snorted. He opened his eyes in surprise. "That's stupid. That's like going to someone who's just won the
lottery, taking their money, and saying, "Look, let's just go back to how things should be. It's better that
way." And I'm not buying it."
"I'm hardly a lottery prize," he growled.
"That's right. You're much better."
He rolled his eyes and set his lips. "Bella, we're not having this discussion anymore. I refuse to damn you
to an eternity of night and that's the end of it."
"If you think that's the end, then you don't know me very well," I warned him. "You're not the only
vampire I know."
His eyes went black again. "Alice wouldn't dare."

Edward helped me into his car, being very careful of the wisps of silk and chiffon, the flowers he'd just
pinned into my elaborately styled curls, and my bulky walking cast. He ignored the angry set of my
mouth.
When he had me settled, he got in the driver's seat and headed back out the long, narrow drive.
"At what point exactly are you going to tell me what's going on?" I asked grumpily. I really hated
surprises. And he knew that.
"I'm shocked that you haven't figured it out yet." He threw a mocking smile in my direction, and my
breath caught in my throat. Would I ever get used to his perfection?
"I did mention that you looked very nice, didn't I?" I verified.
"Yes." He grinned again. I'd never seen him dress in black before, and, with the contrast against his pale
skin, his beauty was absolutely surreal. That much I couldn't deny, even if the fact that he was wearing a
tuxedo made me very nervous.
Not quite as nervous as the dress. Or the shoe. Only one shoe, as my other foot was still securely
encased in plaster. But the stiletto heel, held on only by satin ribbons, certainly wasn't going to help me as
I tried to hobble around.
"I'm not coming over anymore if Alice is going to treat me like Guinea Pig Barbie when I do," I griped.
I'd spent the better part of the day in Alice's staggeringly vast bathroom, a helpless victim as she played
hairdresser and cosmetician. Whenever I fidgeted or complained, she reminded me that she didn't have
any memories of being human, and asked me not to ruin her vicarious fun. Then she'd dressed me in the
most ridiculous dress — deep blue, frilly and off the shoulders, with French tags I couldn't read — a
dress more suitable for a runway than Forks. Nothing good could come of our formal attire, of that I was
sure. Unless… but I was afraid to put my suspicions into words, even in my own head.
I was distracted then by the sound of a phone ringing. Edward pulled his cell phone from a pocket inside
his jacket, looking briefly at the caller ID before answering.
"Hello, Charlie," he said warily.
"Charlie?" I frowned.
Charlie had been… difficult since my return to Forks. He had compartmentalized my bad experience into
two defined reactions. Toward Carlisle he was almost worshipfully grateful. On the other hand, he was

stubbornly convinced that Edward was at fault — because, if not for him, I wouldn't have left home in the
first place. And Edward was far from disagreeing with him. These days I had rules that hadn't existed
before: curfews… visiting hours.
Something Charlie was saying made Edward's eyes widen in disbelief, and then a grin spread across his
face.
"You're kidding!" He laughed.
"What is it?" I demanded.
He ignored me. "Why don't you let me talk to him?" Edward suggested with evident pleasure. He waited
for a few seconds.
"Hello, Tyler, this is Edward Cullen." His voice was very friendly, on the surface. I knew it well enough to
catch the soft edge of menace. What was Tyler doing at my house? The awful truth began to dawn on
me. I looked again at the inappropriate dress Alice had forced me into.
"I'm sorry if there's been some kind of miscommunication, but Bella is unavailable tonight." Edward's tone
changed, and the threat in his voice was suddenly much more evident as he continued. "To be perfectly
honest, she'll be unavailable every night, as far as anyone besides myself is concerned. No offense. And
I'm sorry about your evening." He didn't sound sorry at all. And then he snapped the phone shut, a huge
smirk on his face.
My face and neck flushed crimson with anger. I could feel the rage-induced tears starting to fill my eyes.
He looked at me in surprise. "Was that last part a bit too much? I didn't mean to offend you."
I ignored that.
"You're taking me to the prom!" I yelled.
It was embarrassingly obvious now. If I'd been paying any attention at all, I'm sure I would have noticed
the date on the posters that decorated the school buildings. But I'd never dreamed he was thinking of
subjecting me to this. Didn't he know me at all?
He wasn't expecting the force of my reaction, that was clear. He pressed his lips together and his eyes
narrowed. "Don't be difficult, Bella."
My eyes flashed to the window; we were halfway to the school already.
"Why are you doing this to me?" I demanded in horror.
He gestured to his tuxedo. "Honestly, Bella, what did you think we were doing?"
I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions —
expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a beauty queen,
were so far wide of the mark. My half-fearful hopes seemed very silly now.
I'd guessed there was some kind of occasion brewing. But prom! That was the furthest thing from my
mind.
The angry tears rolled over my cheeks. I remembered with dismay that I was very uncharacteristically
wearing mascara. I wiped quickly under my eyes to prevent any smudges. My hand was unblackened
when I pulled it away; maybe Alice had known I would need waterproof makeup.

"This is completely ridiculous. Why are you crying?" he demanded in frustration.
"Because I'm mad!"
"Bella." He turned the full force of his scorching golden eyes on me.
"What?" I muttered, distracted.
"Humor me," he insisted.
His eyes were melting all my fury. It was impossible to fight with him when he cheated like that. I gave in
with poor grace.
"Fine," I pouted, unable to glare as effectively as I would have liked. "I'll go quietly. But you'll see. I'm
way overdue for more bad luck. I'll probably break my other leg. Look at this shoe! It's a death trap!" I
held out my good leg as evidence.
"Hmmm." He stared at my leg longer than was necessary. "Remind me to thank Alice for that tonight."
"Alice is going to be there?" That comforted me slightly.
"With Jasper, and Emmett… and Rosalie," he admitted.
The feeling of comfort disappeared. There had been no progress with Rosalie, though I was on quite
good terms with her sometimes-husband. Emmett enjoyed having me around — he thought my bizarre
human reactions were hilarious… or maybe it was just the fact that I fell down a lot that he found so
funny. Rosalie acted as if I didn't exist. While I shook my head to dispel the direction my thoughts had
taken, I thought of something else.
"Is Charlie in on this?" I asked, suddenly suspicious.
"Of course." He grinned, and then chuckled. "Apparently Tyler wasn't, though."
I gritted my teeth. How Tyler could be so delusional, I couldn't imagine. At school, where Charlie
couldn't interfere, Edward and I were inseparable — except for those rare sunny days.
We were at the school now; Rosalie's red convertible was conspicuous in the parking lot. The clouds
were thin today, a few streaks of sunlight escaping through far away in the west.
He got out and walked around the car to open my door. He held out his hand.
I sat stubbornly in my seat, arms folded, feeling a secret twinge of smugness. The lot was crowded with
people in formal dress: witnesses. He couldn't remove me forcibly from the car as he might have if we'd
been alone.
He sighed. "When someone wants to kill you, you're brave as a lion — and then when someone mentions
dancing…" He shook his head.
I gulped. Dancing.
"Bella, I won't let anything hurt you — not even yourself. I won't let go of you once, I promise."
I thought about that and suddenly felt much better. He could see that in my face.
"There, now," he said gently, "it won't be so bad." He leaned down and wrapped one arm around my

I glared at him until he met my gaze. "Just spit it out, Jacob."
"It's so bad."
"I don't care. Tell me," I insisted.
"Okay… but, geez, this sounds bad." He shook his head. "He said to tell you, no, to warn you, that —
and this is his plural, not mine" — he lifted one hand from my waist and made little quotations marks in
the air — '"We'll be watching.'" He watched warily for my reaction.
It sounded like something from a mafia movie. I laughed out loud.
"Sorry you had to do this, Jake," I snickered.
"I don't mind that much." He grinned in relief. His eyes were appraising as they raked quickly over my
dress. "So, should I tell him you said to butt the hell out?" he asked hopefully.
"No," I sighed. "Tell him I said thanks. I know he means well."
The song ended, and I dropped my arms.
His hands hesitated at my waist, and he glanced at my bum leg. "Do you want to dance again? Or can I
help you get somewhere?"
Edward answered for me. "That's all right, Jacob. I'll take it from here."
Jacob flinched, and stared wide-eyed at Edward, who stood just beside us.
"Hey, I didn't see you there," he mumbled. "I guess I'll see you around, Bella." He stepped back, waving
halfheartedly.
I smiled. "Yeah, I'll see you later."
"Sorry," he said again before he turned for the door.
Edward's arms wound around me as the next song started. It was a little up-tempo for slow dancing, but
that didn't seem to concern him. I leaned my head against his chest, content.
"Feeling better?" I teased.
"Not really," he said tersely.
"Don't be mad at Billy," I sighed. "He just worries about me for Charlie's sake. It's nothing personal."
"I'm not mad at Billy," he corrected in a clipped voice. "But his son is irritating me."
I pulled back to look at him. His face was very serious.
"Why?"
"First of all, he made me break my promise."
I stared at him in confusion.
He half-smiled. "I promised I wouldn't let go of you tonight," he explained.

