and his forearm was surprisingly hard and muscular beneath his light skin. He wasn't nearly as slight as
he'd looked next to his burly brother.
The class seemed to drag on longer than the others. Was it because the day was finally coming to a
close, or because I was waiting for his tight fist to loosen? It never did; he continued to sit so still it
looked like he wasn't breathing. What was wrong with him? Was this his normal behavior? I questioned
my judgment on Jessica's bitterness at lunch today. Maybe she was not as resentful as I'd thought.
It couldn't have anything to do with me. He didn't know me from Eve.
I peeked up at him one more time, and regretted it. He was glaring down at me again, his black eyes full
of revulsion. As I flinched away from him, shrinking against my chair, the phrase if looks could kill
suddenly ran through my mind.
At that moment, the bell rang loudly, making me jump, and Edward Cullen was out of his seat. Fluidly he
rose — he was much taller than I'd thought — his back to me, and he was out the door before anyone
else was out of their seat.
I sat frozen in my seat, staring blankly after him. He was so mean. It wasn't fair. I began gathering up my
things slowly, trying to block the anger that filled me, for fear my eyes would tear up. For some reason,
my temper was hardwired to my tear ducts. I usually cried when I was angry, a humiliating tendency.
"Aren't you Isabella Swan?" a male voice asked.
I looked up to see a cute, baby-faced boy, his pale blond hair carefully gelled into orderly spikes, smiling
at me in a friendly way. He obviously didn't think I smelled bad.
"Bella," I corrected him, with a smile.
"I'm Mike."
"Hi, Mike."
"Do you need any help finding your next class?"
"I'm headed to the gym, actually. I think I can find it."
"That's my next class, too." He seemed thrilled, though it wasn't that big of a coincidence in a school this
small.
We walked to class together; he was a chatterer — he supplied most of the conversation, which made it
easy for me. He'd lived in California till he was ten, so he knew how I felt about the sun. It turned out he
was in my English class also. He was the nicest person I'd met today.
But as we were entering the gym, he asked, "So, did you stab Edward Cullen with a pencil or what? I've
never seen him act like that."
I cringed. So I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn't Edward Cullen's usual
behavior. I decided to play dumb.
"Was that the boy I sat next to in Biology?" I asked artlessly.
"Yes," he said. "He looked like he was in pain or something."
"I don't know," I responded. "I never spoke to him."

"He's a weird guy." Mike lingered by me instead of heading to the dressing room. "If I were lucky enough
to sit by you, I would have talked to you."
I smiled at him before walking through the girls' locker room door. He was friendly and clearly admiring.
But it wasn't enough to ease my irritation.
The Gym teacher, Coach Clapp, found me a uniform but didn't make me dress down for today's class.
At home, only two years of RE. were required. Here, P.E. was mandatory all four years. Forks was
literally my personal hell on Earth.
I watched four volleyball games running simultaneously. Remembering how many injuries I had sustained
— and inflicted — playing volleyball, I felt faintly nauseated.
The final bell rang at last. I walked slowly to the office to return my paperwork. The rain had drifted
away, but the wind was strong, and colder. I wrapped my arms around myself.
When I walked into the warm office, I almost turned around and walked back out.
Edward Cullen stood at the desk in front of me. I recognized again that tousled bronze hair. He didn't
appear to notice the sound of my entrance. I stood pressed against the back wall, waiting for the
receptionist to be free.
He was arguing with her in a low, attractive voice. I quickly picked up the gist of the argument. He was
trying to trade from sixth-hour Biology to another time — any other time.
I just couldn't believe that this was about me. It had to be something else, something that happened
before I entered the Biology room. The look on his face must have been about another aggravation
entirely. It was impossible that this stranger could take such a sudden, intense dislike to me.
The door opened again, and the cold wind suddenly gusted through the room, rustling the papers on the
desk, swirling my hair around my face. The girl who came in merely stepped to the desk, placed a note in
the wire basket, and walked out again. But Edward Cullen's back stiffened, and he turned slowly to glare
at me — his face was absurdly handsome — with piercing, hate-filled eyes. For an instant, I felt a thrill of
genuine fear, raising the hair on my arms. The look only lasted a second, but it chilled me more than the
freezing wind. He turned back to the receptionist.
"Never mind, then," he said hastily in a voice like velvet. "I can see that it's impossible. Thank you so
much for your help." And he turned on his heel without another look at me, and disappeared out the
door.
I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip.
"How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally.
"Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced.
When I got to the truck, it was almost the last car in the lot. It seemed like a haven, already the closest
thing to home I had in this damp green hole. I sat inside for a while, just staring out the windshield
blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned the key and the engine roared to life.
I headed back to Charlie's house, fighting tears the whole way there.

The next day was better… and worse.
It was better because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier
because I knew what to expect of my day. Mike came to sit by me in English, and walked me to my next
class, with Chess Club Eric glaring at him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me quite
as much as they had yesterday. I sat with a big group at lunch that included Mike, Eric, Jessica, and
several other people whose names and faces I now remembered. I began to feel like I was treading
water, instead of drowning in it.
It was worse because I was tired; I still couldn't sleep with the wind echoing around the house. It was
worse because Mr. Varner called on me in Trig when my hand wasn't raised and I had the wrong
answer. It was miserable because I had to play volleyball, and the one time I didn't cringe out of the way
of the ball, I hit my teammate in the head with it. And it was worse because Edward Cullen wasn't in
school at all.
All morning I was dreading lunch, fearing his bizarre glares. Part of me wanted to confront him and
demand to know what his problem was. While I was lying sleepless in my bed, I even imagined what I
would say. But I knew myself too well to think I would really have the guts to do it. I made the Cowardly
Lion look like the terminator.
But when I walked into the cafeteria with Jessica — trying to keep my eyes from sweeping the place for
him, and failing entirely — I saw that his four siblings of sorts were sitting together at the same table, and
he was not with them.
Mike intercepted us and steered us to his table. Jessica seemed elated by the attention, and her friends
quickly joined us. But as I tried to listen to their easy chatter, I was terribly uncomfortable, waiting
nervously for the moment he would arrive. I hoped that he would simply ignore me when he came, and
prove my suspicions false.
He didn't come, and as time passed I grew more and more tense.
I walked to Biology with more confidence when, by the end of lunch, he still hadn't showed. Mike, who
was taking on the qualities of a golden retriever, walked faithfully by my side to class. I held my breath at
the door, but Edward Cullen wasn't there, either. I exhaled and went to my seat. Mike followed, talking
about an upcoming trip to the beach. He lingered by my desk till the bell rang. Then he smiled at me
wistfully and went to sit by a girl with braces and a bad perm. It looked like I was going to have to do
something about Mike, and it wouldn't be easy. In a town like this, where everyone lived on top of
everyone else, diplomacy was essential. I had never been enormously tactful; I had no practice dealing
with overly friendly boys.
I was relieved that I had the desk to myself, that Edward was absent. I told myself that repeatedly. But I
couldn't get rid of the nagging suspicion that I was the reason he wasn't there. It was ridiculous, and
egotistical, to think that I could affect anyone that strongly. It was impossible. And yet I couldn't stop
worrying that it was true.
When the school day was finally done, and the blush was fading out of my cheeks from the volleyball
incident, I changed quickly back into my jeans and navy blue sweater. I hurried from the girls' locker
room, pleased to find that I had successfully evaded my retriever friend for the moment. I walked swiftly
out to the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in my truck and dug through my
bag to make sure I had what I needed.
Last night I'd discovered that Charlie couldn't cook much besides fried eggs and bacon. So I requested

always edible. I was surprised, and sad, that he seemed to remember that far back.
"Steak and potatoes," I answered, and he looked relieved.
He seemed to feel awkward standing in the kitchen doing nothing; he lumbered into the living room to
watch TV while I worked. We were both more comfortable that way. I made a salad while the steaks
cooked, and set the table.
I called him in when dinner was ready, and he sniffed appreciatively as he walked into the room.
"Smells good, Bell."
"Thanks."
We ate in silence for a few minutes. It wasn't uncomfortable. Neither of us was bothered by the quiet. In
some ways, we were well suited for living together.
"So, how did you like school? Have you made any friends?" he asked as he was taking seconds.
"Well, I have a few classes with a girl named Jessica. I sit with her friends at lunch. And there's this boy,
Mike, who's very friendly. Everybody seems pretty nice." With one outstanding exception.
"That must be Mike Newton. Nice kid — nice family. His dad owns the sporting goods store just outside
of town. He makes a good living off all the backpackers who come through here."
"Do you know the Cullen family?" I asked hesitantly.
"Dr. Cullen's family? Sure. Dr. Cullen's a great man."
"They… the kids… are a little different. They don't seem to fit in very well at school."
Charlie surprised me by looking angry.
"People in this town," he muttered. "Dr. Cullen is a brilliant surgeon who could probably work in any
hospital in the world, make ten times the salary he gets here," he continued, getting louder. "We're lucky
to have him — lucky that his wife wanted to live in a small town. He's an asset to the community, and all
of those kids are well behaved and polite. I had my doubts, when they first moved in, with all those
adopted teenagers. I thought we might have some problems with them. But they're all very mature — I
haven't had one speck of trouble from any of them. That's more than I can say for the children of some
folks who have lived in this town for generations. And they stick together the way a family should —
camping trips every other weekend… Just because they're newcomers, people have to talk."
It was the longest speech I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people
were saying.
I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I just noticed they kept to themselves. They're all very
attractive," I added, trying to be more complimentary.
"You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the
nurses at the hospital have a hard time concentrating on their work with him around."
We lapsed back into silence as we finished eating. He cleared the table while I started on the dishes. He
went back to the TV, and after I finished washing the dishes by hand — no dishwasher — I went
upstairs unwillingly to work on my math homework. I could feel a tradition in the making.

That night it was finally quiet. I fell asleep quickly, exhausted.
The rest of the week was uneventful. I got used to the routine of my classes. By Friday I was able to
recognize, if not name, almost all the students at school. In Gym, the kids on my team learned not to pass
me the ball and to step quickly in front of me if the other team tried to take advantage of my weakness. I
happily stayed out of their way.
Edward Cullen didn't come back to school.
Every day, I watched anxiously until the rest of the Cullens entered the cafeteria without him. Then I
could relax and join in the lunchtime conversation. Mostly it centered around a trip to the La Push Ocean
Park in two weeks that Mike was putting together. I was invited, and I had agreed to go, more out of
politeness than desire. Beaches should be hot and dry.
By Friday I was perfectly comfortable entering my Biology class, no longer worried that Edward would
be there. For all I knew, he had dropped out of school. I tried not to think about him, but I couldn't
totally suppress the worry that I was responsible for his continued absence, ridiculous as it seemed.
My first weekend in Forks passed without incident. Charlie, unused to spending time in the usually empty
house, worked most of the weekend. I cleaned the house, got ahead on my homework, and wrote my
mom more bogusly cheerful e-mail. I did drive to the library Saturday, but it was so poorly stocked that I
didn't bother to get a card; I would have to make a date to visit Olympia or Seattle soon and find a good
bookstore. I wondered idly what kind of gas mileage the truck got… and shuddered at the thought.
The rain stayed soft over the weekend, quiet, so I was able to sleep well.
People greeted me in the parking lot Monday morning. I didn't know all their names, but I waved back
and smiled at everyone. It was colder this morning, but happily not raining. In English, Mike took his
accustomed seat by my side. We had a pop quiz on Wuthering Heights. It was straightforward, very
easy.
All in all, I was feeling a lot more comfortable than I had thought I would feel by this point. More
comfortable than I had ever expected to feel here.
When we walked out of class, the air was full of swirling bits of white. I could hear people shouting
excitedly to each other. The wind bit at my cheeks, my nose.
"Wow," Mike said. "It's snowing."
I looked at the little cotton fluffs that were building up along the sidewalk and swirling erratically past my
face.
"Ew." Snow. There went my good day.
He looked surprised. "Don't you like snow?"
"No. That means it's too cold for rain." Obviously. "Besides, I thought it was supposed to come down in
flakes — you know, each one unique and all that. These just look like the ends of Q-tips."
"Haven't you ever seen snow fall before?" he asked incredulously.
"Sure I have." I paused. "On TV."
Mike laughed. And then a big, squishy ball of dripping snow smacked into the back of his head. We both

turned to see where it came from. I had my suspicions about Eric, who was walking away, his back
toward us — in the wrong direction for his next class. Mike appatently had the same notion. He bent
over and began scraping together a pile of the white mush.
"I'll see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. "Once people start throwing wet stuff, I go
inside."
He just nodded, his eyes on Eric's retreating figure.
Throughout the morning, everyone chattered excitedly about the snow; apparently it was the first snowfall
of the new year. I kept my mouth shut. Sure, it was drier than rain — until it melted in your socks.
I walked alertly to the cafeteria with Jessica after Spanish. Mush balls were flying everywhere. I kept a
binder in my hands, ready to use it as a shield if necessary. Jessica thought I was hilarious, but something
in my expression kept her from lobbing a snowball at me herself.
Mike caught up to us as we walked in the doors, laughing, with ice melting the spikes in his hair. He and
Jessica were talking animatedly about the snow fight as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that
table in the corner out of habit. And then I froze where I stood. There were five people at the table.
Jessica pulled on my arm.
"Hello? Bella? What do you want?"
I looked down; my ears were hot. I had no reason to feel self-conscious, I reminded myself. I hadn't
done anything wrong.
"What's with Bella?" Mike asked Jessica.
"Nothing," I answered. "I'll just get a soda today." I caught up to the end of the line.
"Aren't you hungry?" Jessica asked.
"Actually, I feel a little sick," I said, my eyes still on the floor.
I waited for them to get their food, and then followed them to a table, my eyes on my feet.
I sipped my soda slowly, my stomach churning. Twice Mike asked, with unnecessary concern, how I
was feeling.
I told him it was nothing, but I was wondering if I should play it up and escape to the nurse's office for
the next hour.
Ridiculous. I shouldn't have to run away.
I decided to permit myself one glance at the Cullen family's table. If he was glaring at me, I would skip
Biology, like the coward I was.
I kept my head down and glanced up under my lashes. None of them were looking this way. I lifted my
head a little.
They were laughing. Edward, Jasper, and Emmett all had their hair entirely saturated with melting snow.
Alice and Rosalie were leaning away as Emmett shook his dripping hair toward them. They were
enjoying the snowy day, just like everyone else — only they looked more like a scene from a movie than
the rest of us.

But, aside from the laughter and playfulness, there was something different, and I couldn't quite pinpoint
what that difference was. I examined Edward the most carefully. His skin was less pale, I decided —
flushed from the snow fight maybe — the circles under his eyes much less noticeable. But there was
something more. I pondered, staring, trying to isolate the change.
"Bella, what are you staring at?" Jessica intruded, her eyes following my stare.
At that precise moment, his eyes flashed over to meet mine.
I dropped my head, letting my hair fall to conceal my face. I was sure, though, in the instant our eyes met,
that he didn't look harsh or unfriendly as he had the last time I'd seen him. He looked merely curious
again, unsatisfied in some way.
"Edward Cullen is staring at you," Jessica giggled in my ear.
"He doesn't look angry, does he?" I couldn't help asking.
"No," she said, sounding confused by my question. "Should he be?"
"I don't think he likes me," I confided. I still felt queasy. I put my head down on my arm.
"The Cullens don't like anybody… well, they don't notice anybody enough to like them. But he's still
staring at you."
"Stop looking at him," I hissed.
She snickered, but she looked away. I raised my head enough to make sure that she did, contemplating
violence if she resisted.
Mike interrupted us then — he was planning an epic battle of the blizzard in the parking lot after school
and wanted us to join. Jessica agreed enthusiastically. The way she looked at Mike left little doubt that
she would be up for anything he suggested. I kept silent. I would have to hide in the gym until the parking
lot cleared.
For the rest of the lunch hour I very carefully kept my eyes at my own table. I decided to honor the
bargain I'd made with myself. Since he didn't look angry, I would go to Biology. My stomach did
frightened little flips at the thought of sitting next to him again.
I didn't really want to walk to class with Mike as usual — he seemed to be a popular target for the
snowball snipers — but when we went to the door, everyone besides me groaned in unison. It was
raining, washing all traces of the snow away in clear, icy ribbons down the side of the walkway. I pulled
my hood up, secretly pleased. I would be free to go straight home after Gym.
Mike kept up a string of complaints on the way to building four.
Once inside the classroom, I saw with relief that my table was still empty. Mr. Banner was walking
around the room, distributing one microscope and box of slides to each table. Class didn't start for a few
minutes, and the room buzzed with conversation. I kept my eyes away from the door, doodling idly on
the cover of my notebook.
I heard very clearly when the chair next to me moved, but my eyes stayed carefully focused on the
pattern I was drawing.
"Hello," said a quiet, musical voice.

microscope. I watched him, still staggered, as he examined the slide for an even shorter time than I had.
"Prophase," he agreed, writing it neatly in the first space on our worksheet. He swiftly switched out the
first slide for the second, and then glanced at it cursorily.
"Anaphase," he murmured, writing it down as he spoke.
I kept my voice indifferent. "May I?"
He smirked and pushed the microscope to me.
I looked through the eyepiece eagerly, only to be disappointed. Dang it, he was right.
"Slide three?" I held out my hand without looking at him.
He handed it to me; it seemed like he was being careful not to touch my skin again.
I took the most fleeting look I could manage.
"Interphase." I passed him the microscope before he could ask for it. He took a swift peek, and then
wrote it down. I would have written it while he looked, but his clear, elegant script intimidated me. I
didn't want to spoil the page with my clumsy scrawl.
We were finished before anyone else was close. I could see Mike and his partner comparing two slides
again and again, and another group had their book open under the table.
Which left me with nothing to do but try to not look at him… unsuccessfully. I glanced up, and he was
staring at me, that same inexplicable look of frustration in his eyes. Suddenly I identified that subtle
difference in his face.
"Did you get contacts?" I blurted out unthinkingly.
He seemed puzzled by my unexpected question. "No."
"Oh," I mumbled. "I thought there was something different about your eyes."
He shrugged, and looked away.
In fact, I was sure there was something different. I vividly remembered the flat black color of his eyes the
last time he'd glared at me — the color was striking against the background of his pale skin and his
auburn hair. Today, his eyes were a completely different color: a strange ocher, darker than butterscotch,
but with the same golden tone. I didn't understand how that could be, unless he was lying for some
reason about the contacts. Or maybe Forks was making me crazy in the literal sense of the word.
I looked down. His hands were clenched into hard fists again.
Mr. Banner came to our table then, to see why we weren't working. He looked over our shoulders to
glance at the completed lab, and then stared more intently to check the answers.
"So, Edward, didn't you think Isabella should get a chance with the microscope?" Mr. Banner asked.
"Bella," Edward corrected automatically. "Actually, she identified three of the five."
Mr. Banner looked at me now; his expression was skeptical.
"Have you done this lab before?" he asked.

"On the contrary, I find you very difficult to read." Despite everything that I'd said and he'd guessed, he
sounded like he meant it.
"You must be a good reader then," I replied.
"Usually." He smiled widely, flashing a set of perfect, ultrawhite teeth.
Mr. Banner called the class to order then, and I turned with relief to listen. I was in disbelief that I'd just
explained my dreary life to this bizarre, beautiful boy who may or may not despise me. He'd seemed
engrossed in our conversation, but now I could see, from the corner of my eye, that he was leaning away
from me again, his hands gripping the edge of the table with unmistakable tension.
I tried to appear attentive as Mr. Banner illustrated, with transparencies on the overhead projector, what
I had seen without difficulty through the microscope. But my thoughts were unmanageable.
When the bell finally rang, Edward rushed as swiftly and as gracefully from the room as he had last
Monday. And, like last Monday, I stared after him in amazement.
Mike skipped quickly to my side and picked up my books for me. I imagined him with a wagging tail.
"That was awful," he groaned. "They all looked exactly the same. You're lucky you had Cullen for a
partner."
"I didn't have any trouble with it," I said, stung by his assumption. I regretted the snub instantly. "I've done
the lab before, though," I added before he could get his feelings hurt.
"Cullen seemed friendly enough today," he commented as we shrugged into our raincoats. He didn't seem
pleased about it.
I tried to sound indifferent. "I wonder what was with him last Monday."
I couldn't concentrate on Mike's chatter as we walked to Gym, and RE. didn't do much to hold my
attention, either. Mike was on my team today. He chivalrously covered my position as well as his own,
so my woolgathering was only interrupted when it was my turn to serve; my team ducked warily out of
the way every time I was up.
The rain was just a mist as I walked to the parking lot, but I was happier when I was in the dry cab. I got
the heater running, for once not caring about the mind-numbing roar of the engine. I unzipped my jacket,
put the hood down, and fluffed my damp hair out so the heater could dry it on the way home.
I looked around me to make sure it was clear. That's when I noticed the still, white figure. Edward Cullen
was leaning against the front door of the Volvo, three cars down from me, and staring intently in my
direction. I swiftly looked away and threw the truck into reverse, almost hitting a rusty Toyota Corolla in
my haste. Lucky for the Toyota, I stomped on the brake in time. It was just the sort of car that my truck
would make scrap metal of. I took a deep breath, still looking out the other side of my car, and
cautiously pulled out again, with greater success. I stared straight ahead as I passed the Volvo, but from
a peripheral peek, I would swear I saw him laughing.

It was the light. It was still the gray-green light of a cloudy day in the forest, but it was clearer somehow. I
realized there was no fog veiling my window.
I jumped up to look outside, and then groaned in horror.
A fine layer of snow covered the yard, dusted the top of my truck, and whitened the road. But that
wasn't the worst part. All the rain from yesterday had frozen solid — coating the needles on the trees in
fantastic, gorgeous patterns, and making the driveway a deadly ice slick. I had enough trouble not falling
down when the ground was dry; it might be safer for me to go back to bed now.
Charlie had left for work before I got downstairs. In a lot of ways, living with Charlie was like having my
own place, and I found myself reveling in the aloneness instead of being lonely.
I threw down a quick bowl of cereal and some orange juice from the carton. I felt excited to go to
school, and that scared me. I knew it wasn't the stimulating learning environment I was anticipating, or
seeing my new set of friends. If I was being honest with myself, I knew I was eager to get to school
because I would see Edward Cullen. And that was very, very stupid.
I should be avoiding him entirely after my brainless and embarrassing babbling yesterday. And I was
suspicious of him; why should he lie about his eyes? I was still frightened of the hostility I sometimes felt
emanating from him, and I was still tongue-tied whenever I pictured his perfect face. I was well aware
that my league and his league were spheres that did not touch. So I shouldn't be at all anxious to see him
today.
It took every ounce of my concentration to make it down the icy brick driveway alive. I almost lost my
balance when I finally got to the truck, but I managed to cling to the side mirror and save myself. Clearly,
today was going to be nightmarish.
Driving to school, I distracted myself from my fear of falling and my unwanted speculations about
Edward Cullen by thinking about Mike and Eric, and the obvious difference in how teenage boys
responded to me here. I was sure I looked exactly the same as I had in Phoenix. Maybe it was just that
the boys back home had watched me pass slowly through all the awkward phases of adolescence and
still thought of me that way. Perhaps it was because I was a novelty here, where novelties were few and
far between. Possibly my crippling clumsiness was seen as endearing rather than pathetic, casting me as a
damsel in distress. Whatever the reason, Mike's puppy dog behavior and Eric's apparent rivalry with him
were disconcerting. I wasn't sure if I didn't prefer being ignored.
My truck seemed to have no problem with the black ice that covered the roads. I drove very slowly,
though, not wanting to carve a path of destruction through Main Street.
When I got out of my truck at school, I saw why I'd had so little trouble. Something silver caught my eye,
and I walked to the back of the truck — carefully holding the side for support — to examine my tires.
There were thin chains crisscrossed in diamond shapes around them. Charlie had gotten up who knows
how early to put snow chains on my truck. My throat suddenly felt tight. I wasn't used to being taken
care of, and Charlie's unspoken concern caught me by surprise.
I was standing by the back corner of the truck, struggling to fight back the sudden wave of emotion the
snow chains had brought on, when I heard an odd sound.
It was a high-pitched screech, and it was fast becoming painfully loud. I looked up, startled.
I saw several things simultaneously. Nothing was moving in slow motion, the way it does in the movies.
Instead, the adrenaline rush seemed to make my brain work much faster, and I was able to absorb in

He was staring at me incredulously. But his face was tense, defensive.
"You think I lifted a van off you?" His tone questioned my sanity, but it only made me more suspicious. It
was like a perfectly delivered line by a skilled actor.
I merely nodded once, jaw tight.
"Nobody will believe that, you know." His voice held an edge of derision now.
"I'm not going to tell anybody." I said each word slowly, carefully controlling my anger.
Surprise flitted across his face. "Then why does it matter?"
"It matters to me," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good reason why I'm doing it."
"Can't you just thank me and get over it?"
"Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant.
"You're not going to let it go, are you?"
"No."
"In that case… I hope you enjoy disappointment."
We scowled at each other in silence. I was the first to speak, trying to keep myself focused. I was in
danger of being distracted by his livid, glorious face. It was like trying to stare down a destroying angel.
"Why did you even bother?" I asked frigidly.
He paused, and for a brief moment his stunning face was unexpectedly vulnerable.
"I don't know," he whispered.
And then he turned his back on me and walked away.
I was so angry, it took me a few minutes until I could move. When I could walk, I made my way slowly
to the exit at the end of the hallway.
The waiting room was more unpleasant than I'd feared. It seemed like every face I knew in Forks was
there, staring at me. Charlie rushed to my side; I put up my hands.
"There's nothing wrong with me," I assured him sullenly. I was still aggravated, not in the mood for
chitchat.
"What did the doctor say?"
"Dr. Cullen saw me, and he said I was fine and I could go home." I sighed. Mike and Jessica and Eric
were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged.
Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me to the glass doors of the exit. I
waved sheepishly at my friends, hoping to convey that they didn't need to worry anymore. It was a huge
relief— the first time I'd ever felt that way — to get into the cruiser.
We drove in silence. I was so wrapped up in my thoughts that I barely knew Charlie was there. I was
positive that Edward's defensive behavior in the hall was a confirmation of the bizarre things I still could

In my dream it was very dark, and what dim light there was seemed to be radiating from Edward's skin. I
couldn't see his face, just his back as he walked away from me, leaving me in the blackness. No matter
how fast I ran, I couldn't catch up to him; no matter how loud I called, he never turned. Troubled, I woke
in the middle of the night and couldn't sleep again for what seemed like a very long time. After that, he
was in my dreams nearly every night, but always on the periphery, never within reach.
The month that followed the accident was uneasy, tense, and, at first, embarrassing.
To my dismay, I found myself the center of attention for the rest of that week. Tyler Crowley was
impossible, following me around, obsessed with making amends to me somehow. I tried to convince him
what I wanted more than anything else was for him to forget all about it — especially since nothing had
actually happened to me — but he remained insistent. He followed me between classes and sat at our
now-crowded lunch table. Mike and Eric were even less friendly toward him than they were to each
other, which made me worry that I'd gained another unwelcome fan.
No one seemed concerned about Edward, though I explained over and over that he was the hero —
how he had pulled me out of the way and had nearly been crushed, too. I tried to be convincing. Jessica,
Mike, Eric, and everyone else always commented that they hadn't even seen him there till the van was
pulled away.
I wondered to myself why no one else had seen him standing so far away, before he was suddenly,
impossibly saving my life. With chagrin, I realized the probable cause — no one else was as aware of
Edward as I always was. No one else watched him the way I did. How pitiful.
Edward was never surrounded by crowds of curious bystanders eager for his firsthand account. People

avoided him as usual. The Cullens and the Hales sat at the same table as always, not eating, talking only
among themselves. None of them, especially Edward, glanced my way anymore.
When he sat next to me in class, as far from me as the table would allow, he seemed totally unaware of
my presence. Only now and then, when his fists would suddenly ball up — skin stretched even whiter
over the bones — did I wonder if he wasn't quite as oblivious as he appeared.
He wished he hadn't pulled me from the path of Tyler's van — there was no other conclusion I could
come to.
I wanted very much to talk to him, and the day after the accident I tried. The last time I'd seen him,
outside the ER, we'd both been so furious. I still was angry that he wouldn't trust me with the truth, even
though I was keeping my part of the bargain flawlessly. But he had in fact saved my life, no matter how
he'd done it. And, overnight, the heat of my anger faded into awed gratitude.
He was already seated when I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to turn
toward me. He showed no sign that he realized I was there.
"Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was going to behave myself.
He turned his head a fraction toward me without meeting my gaze, nodded once, and then looked the
other way.
And that was the last contact I'd had with him, though he was there, a foot away from me, every day. I
watched him sometimes, unable to stop myself— from a distance, though, in the cafeteria or parking lot. I
watched as his golden eyes grew perceptibly darker day by day. But in class I gave no more notice that
he existed than he showed toward me. I was miserable. And the dreams continued.
Despite my outright lies, the tenor of my e-mails alerted Renée to my depression, and she called a few
times, worried. I tried to convince her it was just the weather that had me down.
Mike, at least, was pleased by the obvious coolness between me and my lab partner. I could see he'd
been worried that Edward's daring rescue might have impressed me, and he was relieved that it seemed
to have the opposite effect. He grew more confident, sitting on the edge of my table to talk before
Biology class started, ignoring Edward as completely as he ignored us.
The snow washed away for good after that one dangerously icy day. Mike was disappointed he'd never
gotten to stage his snowball fight, but pleased that the beach trip would soon be possible. The rain
continued heavily, though, and the weeks passed.
Jessica made me aware of another event looming on the horizon — she called the first Tuesday of March
to ask my permission to invite Mike to the girls' choice spring dance in two weeks.
"Are you sure you don't mind… you weren't planning to ask him?" she persisted when I told her I didn't
mind in the least.
"No, Jess, I'm not going," I assured her. Dancing was glaringly outside my range of abilities.
"It will be really fun." Her attempt to convince me was halfhearted. I suspected that Jessica enjoyed my
inexplicable popularity more than my actual company.
"You have fun with Mike," I encouraged.
The next day, I was surprised that Jessica wasn't her usual gushing self in Trig and Spanish. She was

silent as she walked by my side between classes, and I was afraid to ask her why. If Mike had turned her
down, I was the last person she would want to tell.
My fears were strengthened during lunch when Jessica sat as far from Mike as possible, chatting
animatedly with Eric. Mike was unusually quiet.
Mike was still quiet as he walked me to class, the uncomfortable look on his face a bad sign. But he
didn't broach the subject until I was in my seat and he was perched on my desk. As always, I was
electrically aware of Edward sitting close enough to touch, as distant as if he were merely an invention of
my imagination.
"So," Mike said, looking at the floor, "Jessica asked me to the spring dance."
"That's great." I made my voice bright and enthusiastic. "You'll have a lot of fun with Jessica."
"Well…" He floundered as he examined my smile, clearly not happy with my response. "I told her I had
to think about it."
"Why would you do that?" I let disapproval color my tone, though I was relieved he hadn't given her an
absolute no.
His face was bright red as he looked down again. Pity shook my resolve.
"I was wondering if… well, if you might be planning to ask me."
I paused for a moment, hating the wave of guilt that swept through me. But I saw, from the corner of my
eye, Edward's head tilt reflexively in my direction.
"Mike, I think you should tell her yes," I said.
"Did you already ask someone?" Did Edward notice how Mike's eyes flickered in his direction?
"No," I assured him. "I'm not going to the dance at all."
"Why not?" Mike demanded.
I didn't want to get into the safety hazards that dancing presented, so I quickly made new plans.
"I'm going to Seattle that Saturday," I explained. I needed to get out of town anyway — it was suddenly
the perfect time to go.
"Can't you go some other weekend?"
"Sorry, no," I said. "So you shouldn't make Jess wait any longer — it's rude."
"Yeah, you're right," he mumbled, and turned, dejected, to walk back to his seat. I closed my eyes and
pressed my fingers to my temples, trying to push the guilt and sympathy out of my head. Mr. Banner
began talking. I sighed and opened my eyes.
And Edward was staring at me curiously, that same, familiar edge of frustration even more distinct now in
his black eyes.
I stared back, surprised, expecting him to look quickly away. But instead he continued to gaze with
probing intensity into my eyes. There was no question of me looking away. My hands started to shake.

acknowledge him.
While I was sitting there, looking everywhere but at the car in front of me, I heard a knock on my
passenger side window. I looked over; it was Tyler. I glanced back in my rearview mirror, confused. His
car was still running, the door left open. I leaned across the cab to crank the window down. It was stiff. I
got it halfway down, then gave up.
"I'm sorry, Tyler, I'm stuck behind Cullen." I was annoyed — obviously the holdup wasn't my fault.
"Oh, I know — I just wanted to ask you something while we're trapped here." He grinned.
This could not be happening.
"Will you ask me to the spring dance?" he continued.
"I'm not going to be in town, Tyler." My voice sounded a little sharp. I had to remember it wasn't his fault
that Mike and Eric had already used up my quota of patience for the day.
"Yeah, Mike said that," he admitted.
"Then why —"
He shrugged. "I was hoping you were just letting him down easy."
Okay, it was completely his fault.
"Sorry, Tyler," I said, working to hide my irritation. "I really am going out of town."
"That's cool. We still have prom."
And before I could respond, he was walking back to his car. I could feel the shock on my face. I looked
forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper all sliding into the Volvo. In his rearview mirror,
Edward's eyes were on me. He was unquestionably shaking with laughter, as if he'd heard every word
Tyler had said. My foot itched toward the gas pedal… one little bump wouldn't hurt any of them, just that
glossy silver paint job. I revved the engine.
But they were all in, and Edward was speeding away. I drove home slowly, carefully, muttering to myself
the whole way.
When I got home, I decided to make chicken enchiladas for dinner. It was a long process, and it would
keep me busy. While I was simmering the onions and chilies, the phone rang. I was almost afraid to
answer it, but it might be Charlie or my mom.
It was Jessica, and she was jubilant; Mike had caught her after school to accept her invitation. I
celebrated with her briefly while I stirred. She had to go, she wanted to call Angela and Lauren to tell
them. I suggested — with casual innocence — that maybe Angela, the shy girl who had Biology with me,
could ask Eric. And Lauren, a standoffish girl who had always ignored me at the lunch table, could ask
Tyler; I'd heard he was still available. Jess thought that was a great idea. Now that she was sure of Mike,
she actually sounded sincere when she said she wished I would go to the dance. I gave her my Seattle
excuse.
After I hung up, I tried to concentrate on dinner — dicing the chicken especially; I didn't want to take
another trip to the emergency room. But my head was spinning, trying to analyze every word Edward
had spoken today. What did he mean, it was better if we weren't friends?

I made my way to English in a daze. I didn't even realize when I first walked in that class had already
started.
"Thank you for joining us, Miss Swan," Mr. Mason said in a disparaging tone.
I flushed and hurried to my seat.
It wasn't till class ended that I realized Mike wasn't sitting in his usual seat next to me. I felt a twinge of
guilt. But he and Eric both met me at the door as usual, so I figured I wasn't totally unforgiven. Mike
seemed to become more himself as we walked, gaining enthusiasm as he talked about the weather report
for this weekend. The rain was supposed to take a minor break, and so maybe his beach trip would be
possible. I tried to sound eager, to make up for disappointing him yesterday. It was hard; rain or no rain,
it would still only be in the high forties, if we were lucky.
The rest of the morning passed in a blur. It was difficult to believe that I hadn't just imagined what
Edward had said, and the way his eyes had looked. Maybe it was just a very convincing dream that I'd
confused with reality. That seemed more probable than that I really appealed to him on any level.
So I was impatient and frightened as Jessica and I entered the cafeteria. I wanted to see his face, to see if
he'd gone back to the cold, indifferent person I'd known for the last several weeks. Or if, by some
miracle, I'd really heard what I thought I'd heard this morning. Jessica babbled on and on about her
dance plans — Lauren and Angela had asked the other boys and they were all going together —
completely unaware of my inattention.
Disappointment flooded through me as my eyes unerringly focused on his table. The other four were
there, but he was absent. Had he gone home? I followed the still-babbling Jessica through the line,
crushed. I'd lost my appetite — I bought nothing but a bottle of lemonade. I just wanted to go sit down
and sulk.
"Edward Cullen is staring at you again," Jessica said, finally breaking through my abstraction with his
name. "I wonder why he's sitting alone today."
My head snapped up. I followed her gaze to see Edward, smiling crookedly, staring at me from an empty
table across the cafeteria from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, he raised one hand and
motioned with his index finger for me to join him. As I stared in disbelief, he winked.

"Do you?" His face was abruptly severe, as if he were afraid that he'd accidentally said too much.
"You're dangerous?" I guessed, my pulse quickening as I intuitively realized the truth of my own words.
He was dangerous. He'd been trying to tell me that all along.
He just looked at me, eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend.
"But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "No, I don't believe that you're bad."
"You're wrong." His voice was almost inaudible. He looked down, stealing my bottle lid and then
spinning it on its side between his fingers. I stared at him, wondering why I didn't feel afraid. He meant
what he was saying — that was obvious. But I just felt anxious, on edge… and, more than anything else,
fascinated. The same way I always felt when I was near him.
The silence lasted until I noticed that the cafeteria was almost empty.
I jumped to my feet. "We're going to be late."
"I'm not going to class today," he said, twirling the lid so fast it was just a blur.
"Why not?"
"It's healthy to ditch class now and then." He smiled up at me, but his eyes were still troubled.
"Well, I'm going," I told him. I was far too big a coward to risk getting caught.
He turned his attention back to his makeshift top. "I'll see you later, then."
I hesitated, torn, but then the first bell sent me hurrying out the door — with a last glance confirming that
he hadn't moved a centimeter.
As I half-ran to class, my head was spinning faster than the bottle cap. So few questions had been
answered in comparison to how many new questions had been raised. At least the rain had stopped.
I was lucky; Mr. Banner wasn't in the room yet when I arrived. I settled quickly into my seat, aware that
both Mike and Angela were staring at me. Mike looked resentful; Angela looked surprised, and slightly
awed.
Mr. Banner came in the room then, calling the class to order. He was juggling a few small cardboard
boxes in his arms. He put them down on Mike's table, telling him to start passing them around the class.
"Okay, guys, I want you all to take one piece from each box," he said as he produced a pair of rubber
gloves from the pocket of his lab jacket and pulled them on. The sharp sound as the gloves snapped into
place against his wrists seemed ominous to me. "The first should be an indicator card," he went on,
grabbing a white card with four squares marked on it and displaying it. "The second is a four-pronged
applicator —" he held up something that looked like a nearly toothless hair pick "— and the third is a
sterile micro-lancet." He held up a small piece of blue plastic and split it open. The barb was invisible
from this distance, but my stomach flipped.
"I'll be coming around with a dropper of water to prepare your cards, so please don't start until I get to
you." He began at Mike's table again, carefully putting one drop of water in each of the four squares.
"Then I want you to carefully prick your finger with the lancet…" He grabbed Mike's hand and jabbed
the spike into the tip of Mike's middle finger. Oh no. Clammy moisture broke out across my forehead.
"Put a small drop of blood on each of the prongs." He demonstrated, squeezing Mike's finger till the

blood flowed. I swallowed convulsively, my stomach heaving.
"And then apply it to the card," he finished, holding up the dripping red card for us to see. I closed my
eyes, trying to hear through the ringing in my ears.
"The Red Cross is having a blood drive in Port Angeles next weekend, so I thought you should all know
your blood type." He sounded proud of himself. "Those of you who aren't eighteen yet will need a
parent's permission — I have slips at my desk."
He continued through the room with his water drops. I put my cheek against the cool black tabletop and
tried to hold on to my consciousness. All around me I could hear squeals, complaints, and giggles as my
classmates skewered their fingers. I breathed slowly in and out through my mouth.
"Bella, are you all right?" Mr. Banner asked. His voice was close to my head, and it sounded alarmed.
"I already know my blood type, Mr. Banner," I said in a weak voice. I was afraid to raise my head.
"Are you feeling faint?"
"Yes, sir," I muttered, internally kicking myself for not ditching when I had the chance.
"Can someone take Bella to the nurse, please?" he called.
I didn't have to look up to know that it would be Mike who volunteered.
"Can you walk?" Mr. Banner asked.
"Yes," I whispered. Just let me get out of here, I thought. I'll crawl.
Mike seemed eager as he put his arm around my waist and pulled my arm over his shoulder. I leaned
against him heavily on the way out of the classroom.
Mike towed me slowly across campus. When we were around the edge of the cafeteria, out of sight of
building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped.
"Just let me sit for a minute, please?" I begged.
He helped me sit on the edge of the walk.
"And whatever you do, keep your hand in your pocket," I warned. I was still so dizzy. I slumped over on
my side, putting my cheek against the freezing, damp cement of the sidewalk, closing my eyes. That
seemed to help a little.
"Wow, you're green, Bella," Mike said nervously.
"Bella?" a different voice called from the distance.
No! Please let me be imagining that horribly familiar voice.
"What's wrong — is she hurt?" His voice was closer now, and he sounded upset. I wasn't imagining it. I
squeezed my eyes shut, hoping to die. Or, at the very least, not to throw up.
Mike seemed stressed. "I think she's fainted. I don't know what happened, she didn't even stick her
finger."
"Bella." Edward's voice was right beside me, relieved now. "Can you hear me?"

"No," I groaned. "Go away."
He chuckled.
"I was taking her to the nurse," Mike explained in a defensive tone, "but she wouldn't go any farther."
"I'll take her," Edward said. I could hear the smile still in his voice. "You can go back to class."
"No," Mike protested. "I'm supposed to do it."
Suddenly the sidewalk disappeared from beneath me. My eyes flew open in shock. Edward had
scooped me up in his arms, as easily as if I weighed ten pounds instead of a hundred and ten.
"Put me down!" Please, please let me not vomit on him. He was walking before I was finished talking.
"Hey!" Mike called, already ten paces behind us.
Edward ignored him. "You look awful," he told me, grinning.
"Put me back on the sidewalk," I moaned. The rocking movement of his walk was not helping. He held
me away from his body, gingerly, supporting all my weight with just his arms — it didn't seem to bother
him.
"So you faint at the sight of blood?" he asked. This seemed to entertain him.
I didn't answer. I closed my eyes again and fought the nausea with all my strength, clamping my lips
together.
"And not even your own blood," he continued, enjoying himself.
I don't know how he opened the door while carrying me, but it was suddenly warm, so I knew we were
inside.
"Oh my," I heard a female voice gasp.
"She fainted in Biology," Edward explained.
I opened my eyes. I was in the office, and Edward was striding past the front counter toward the nurse's
door. Ms. Cope, the redheaded front office receptionist, ran ahead of him to hold it open. The
grandmotherly nurse looked up from a novel, astonished, as Edward swung me into the room and placed
me gently on the crackly paper that covered the brown vinyl mattress on the one cot. Then he moved to
stand against the wall as far across the narrow room as possible. His eyes were bright, excited.
"She's just a little faint," he reassured the startled nurse. "They're blood typing in Biology."
The nurse nodded sagely. "There's always one."
He muffled a snicker.
"Just lie down for a minute, honey; it'll pass."
"I know," I sighed. The nausea was already fading.
"Does this happen a lot?" she asked.
"Sometimes," I admitted. Edward coughed to hide another laugh.

"You can go back to class now," she told him.
"I'm supposed to stay with her." He said this with such assured authority that — even though she pursed
her lips — the nurse didn't argue it further.
"I'll go get you some ice for your forehead, dear," she said to me, and then bustled out of the room.
"You were right," I moaned, letting my eyes close.
"I usually am — but about what in particular this time?"
"Ditching is healthy." I practiced breathing evenly.
"You scared me for a minute there," he admitted after a pause. His tone made it sound like he was
confessing a humiliating weakness. "I thought Newton was dragging your dead body off to bury it in the
woods."
"Ha ha." I still had my eyes closed, but I was feeling more normal every minute.
"Honestly — I've seen corpses with better color. I was concerned that I might have to avenge your
murder."
"Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad."
"He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully.
"You can't know that," I argued, but then I wondered suddenly if he could.
"I saw his face — I could tell."
"How did you see me? I thought you were ditching." I was almost fine now, though the queasiness would
probably pass faster if I'd eaten something for lunch. On the other hand, maybe it was lucky my stomach
was empty.
"I was in my car, listening to a CD." Such a normal response — it surprised me.
I heard the door and opened my eyes to see the nurse with a cold compress in her hand.
"Here you go, dear." She laid it across my forehead. "You're looking better," she added.
"I think I'm fine," I said, sitting up. Just a little ringing in my ears, no spinning. The mint green walls stayed
where they should.
I could see she was about to make me lie back down, but the door opened just then, and Ms. Cope
stuck her head in.
"We've got another one," she warned.
I hopped down to free up the cot for the next invalid.
I handed the compress back to the nurse. "Here, I don't need this."
And then Mike staggered through the door, now supporting a sallow-looking Lee Stephens, another boy
in our Biology class. Edward and I drew back against the wall to give them room.
"Oh no," Edward muttered. "Go out to the office, Bella."

I looked up at him, bewildered.
"Trust me — go."
I spun and caught the door before it closed, darting out of the infirmary. I could feel Edward right behind
me.
"You actually listened to me." He was stunned.
"I smelled the blood," I said, wrinkling my nose. Lee wasn't sick from watching other people, like me.
"People can't smell blood," he contradicted.
"Well, I can — that's what makes me sick. It smells like rust… and salt."
He was staring at me with an unfathomable expression.
"What?" I asked.
"It's nothing."
Mike came through the door then, glancing from me to Edward. The look he gave Edward confirmed
what Edward had said about loathing. He looked back at me, his eyes glum.
"You look better," he accused.
"Just keep your hand in your pocket," I warned him again.
"It's not bleeding anymore," he muttered. "Are you going back to class?"
"Are you kidding? I'd just have to turn around and come back."
"Yeah, I guess… So are you going this weekend? To the beach?" While he spoke, he flashed another
glare toward Edward, who was standing against the cluttered counter, motionless as a sculpture, staring
off into space.
I tried to sound as friendly as possible. "Sure, I said I was in."
"We're meeting at my dad's store, at ten." His eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was giving
out too much information. His body language made it clear that it wasn't an open invitation.
"I'll be there," I promised.
"I'll see you in Gym, then," he said, moving uncertainly toward the door.
"See you," I replied. He looked at me once more, his round face slightly pouting, and then as he walked
slowly through the door, his shoulders slumped. A swell of sympathy washed over me. I pondered seeing
his disappointed face again… in Gym.
"Gym," I groaned.
"I can take care of that." I hadn't noticed Edward moving to my side, but he spoke now in my ear. "Go
sit down and look pale," he muttered.
That wasn't a challenge; I was always pale, and my recent swoon had left a light sheen of sweat on my
face. I sat in one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against the wall with my eyes closed.

Fainting spells always exhausted me.
I heard Edward speaking softly at the counter.
"Ms. Cope?"
"Yes?" I hadn't heard her return to her desk.
"Bella has Gym next hour, and I don't think she feels well enough. Actually, I was thinking I should take
her home now. Do you think you could excuse her from class?" His voice was like melting honey. I could
imagine how much more overwhelming his eyes would be.
"Do you need to be excused, too, Edward?" Ms. Cope fluttered. Why couldn't I do that?
"No, I have Mrs. Goff, she won't mind."
"Okay, it's all taken care of. You feel better, Bella," she called to me. I nodded weakly, hamming it up
just a bit.
"Can you walk, or do you want me to carry you again?" With his back to the receptionist, his expression
became sarcastic.
"I'll walk."
I stood carefully, and I was still fine. He held the door for me, his smile polite but his eyes mocking. I
walked out into the cold, fine mist that had just begun to fall. It felt nice — the first time I'd enjoyed the
constant moisture falling out of the sky — as it washed my face clean of the sticky perspiration.
"Thanks," I said as he followed me out. "It's almost worth getting sick to miss Gym."
"Anytime." He was staring straight forward, squinting into the rain.
"So are you going? This Saturday, I mean?" I was hoping he would, though it seemed unlikely. I couldn't
picture him loading up to carpool with the rest of the kids from school; he didn't belong in the same
world. But just hoping that he might gave me the first twinge of enthusiasm I'd felt for the outing.
"Where are you all going, exactly?" He was still looking ahead, expressionless.
"Down to La Push, to First Beach." I studied his face, trying to read it. His eyes seemed to narrow
infinitesimally.
He glanced down at me from the corner of his eye, smiling wryly. "I really don't think I was invited."
I sighed. "I just invited you."
"Let's you and I not push poor Mike any further this week. We don't want him to snap." His eyes
danced; he was enjoying the idea more than he should.
"Mike-schmike." I muttered, preoccupied by the way he'd said "you and I." I liked it more than I should.
We were near the parking lot now. I veered left, toward my truck. Something caught my jacket, yanking
me back.
"Where do you think you're going?" he asked, outraged. He was gripping a fistful of my jacket in one
hand.

As I sat in my room, trying to concentrate on the third act of Macbeth, I was really listening for my truck.
I would have thought, even over the pounding rain, I could have heard the engine's roar. But when I went
to peek out the curtain — again — it was suddenly there.
I wasn't looking forward to Friday, and it more than lived up to my non-expectations. Of course there
were the fainting comments. Jessica especially seemed to get a kick out of that story. Luckily Mike had
kept his mouth shut, and no one seemed to know about Edward's involvement. She did have a lot of
questions about lunch, though.
"So what did Edward Cullen want yesterday?" Jessica asked in Trig.
"I don't know," I answered truthfully. "He never really got to the point."
"You looked kind of mad," she fished.
"Did I?" I kept my expression blank.
"You know, I've never seen him sit with anyone but his family before. That was weird."
"Weird," I agreed. She seemed annoyed; she flipped her dark curls impatiently — I guessed she'd been
hoping to hear something that would make a good story for her to pass on.
The worst part about Friday was that, even though I knew he wasn't going to be there, I still hoped.
When I walked into the cafeteria with Jessica and Mike, I couldn't keep from looking at his table, where
Rosalie, Alice, and Jasper sat talking, heads close together. And I couldn't stop the gloom that engulfed
me as I realized I didn't know how long I would have to wait before I saw him again.
At my usual table, everyone was full of our plans for the next day. Mike was animated again, putting a
great deal of trust in the local weatherman who promised sun tomorrow. I'd have to see that before I
believed it. But it was warmer today — almost sixty. Maybe the outing wouldn't be completely
miserable.

I intercepted a few unfriendly glances from Lauren during lunch, which I didn't understand until we were
all walking out of the room together. I was right behind her, just a foot from her slick, silver blond hair,
and she was evidently unaware of that.
"…don't know why Bella" — she sneered my name — "doesn't just sit with the Cullens from now on."
I heard her muttering to Mike. I'd never noticed what an unpleasant, nasal voice she had, and I was
surprised by the malice in it. I really didn't know her well at all, certainly not well enough for her to dislike
me — or so I'd thought. "She's my friend; she sits with us," Mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit
territorially. I paused to let Jess and Angela pass me. I didn't want to hear any more.

That night at dinner, Charlie seemed enthusiastic about my trip to La Push in the morning. I think he felt
guilty for leaving me home alone on the weekends, but he'd spent too many years building his habits to
break them now. Of course he knew the names of all the kids going, and their parents, and their
great-grandparents, too, probably. He seemed to approve. I wondered if he would approve of my plan
to ride to Seattle with Edward Cullen. Not that I was going to tell him.
"Dad, do you know a place called Goat Rocks or something like that? I think it's south of Mount
Rainier," I asked casually.
"Yeah — why?"
I shrugged. "Some kids were talking about camping there."
"It's not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there
during the hunting season."
"Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the name wrong."
I meant to sleep in, but an unusual brightness woke me. I opened my eyes to see a clear yellow light
streaming through my window. I couldn't believe it. I hurried to the window to check, and sure enough,
there was the sun. It was in the wrong place in the sky, too low, and it didn't seem to be as close as it
should be, but it was definitely the sun. Clouds ringed the horizon, but a large patch of blue was visible in
the middle. I lingered by the window as long as I could, afraid that if I left the blue would disappear
again.
The Newtons' Olympic Outfitters store was just north of town. I'd seen the store, but I'd never stopped
there — not having much need for any supplies required for being outdoors over an extended period of
time. In the parking lot I recognized Mike's Suburban and Tyler's Sentra. As I pulled up next to their
vehicles, I could see the group standing around in front of the Suburban. Eric was there, along with two
other boys I had class with; I was fairly sure their names were Ben and Conner. Jess was there, flanked
by Angela and Lauren. Three other girls stood with them, including one I remembered falling over in Gym
on Friday. That one gave me a dirty look as I got out of the truck, and whispered something to Lauren.
Lauren shook out her cornsilk hair and eyed me scornfully.
So it was going to be one of those days.
At least Mike was happy to see me.
"You came!" he called, delighted. "And I said it would be sunny today, didn't I?"
"I told you I was coming," I reminded him.

"We're just waiting for Lee and Samantha… unless you invited someone," Mike added.
"Nope," I lied lightly, hoping I wouldn't get caught in the lie. But also wishing that a miracle would occur,
and Edward would appear.
Mike looked satisfied.
"Will you ride in my car? It's that or Lee's mom's minivan."
"Sure."
He smiled blissfully. It was so easy to make Mike happy.
"You can have shotgun," he promised. I hid my chagrin. It wasn't as simple to make Mike and Jessica
happy at the same time. I could see Jessica glowering at us now.
The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat
was necessary. I managed to wedge Jess in between Mike and me in the front seat of the Suburban.
Mike could have been more graceful about it, but at least Jess seemed appeased.
It was only fifteen miles to La Push from Forks, with gorgeous, dense green forests edging the road most
of the way and the wide Quillayute River snaking beneath it twice. I was glad I had the window seat.
We'd rolled the windows down — the Suburban was a bit claustrophobic with nine people in it — and I
tried to absorb as much sunlight as possible.
I'd been to the beaches around La Push many times during my Forks summers with Charlie, so the
mile-long crescent of First Beach was familiar to me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray,
even in the sunlight, white-capped and heaving to the gray, rocky shore. Islands rose out of the steel
harbor waters with sheer cliff sides, reaching to uneven summits, and crowned with austere, soaring firs.
The beach had only a thin border of actual sand at the water's edge, after which it grew into millions of
large, smooth stones that looked uniformly gray from a distance, but close up were every shade a stone
could be: terra-cotta, sea green, lavender, blue gray, dull gold. The tide line was strewn with huge
driftwood trees, bleached bone white in the salt waves, some piled together against the edge of the forest
fringe, some lying solitary, just out of reach of the waves.
There was a brisk wind coming off the waves, cool and briny. Pelicans floated on the swells while
seagulls and a lone eagle wheeled above them. The clouds still circled the sky, threatening to invade at
any moment, but for now the sun shone bravely in its halo of blue sky.
We picked our way down to the beach, Mike leading the way to a ring of driftwood logs that had
obviously been used for parties like ours before. There was a fire circle already in place, filled with black
ashes. Eric and the boy I thought was named Ben gathered broken branches of driftwood from the drier
piles against the forest edge, and soon had a teepee-shaped construction built atop the old cinders.
"Have you ever seen a driftwood fire?" Mike asked me. I was sitting on one of the bone-colored
benches; the other girls clustered, gossiping excitedly, on either side of me. Mike kneeled by the fire,
lighting one of the smaller sticks with a cigarette lighter.
"No," I said as he placed the blazing twig carefully against the teepee.
"You'll like this then — watch the colors." He lit another small branch and laid it alongside the first. The
flames started to lick quickly up the dry wood.
"It's blue," I said in surprise.

"The salt does it. Pretty, isn't it?" He lit one more piece, placed it where the fire hadn't yet caught, and
then came to sit by me. Thankfully, Jess was on his other side. She turned to him and claimed his
attention. I watched the strange blue and green flames crackle toward the sky.
After a half hour of chatter, some of the boys wanted to hike to the nearby tidal pools. It was a dilemma.
On the one hand, I loved the tide pools. They had fascinated me since I was a child; they were one of the
only things I ever looked forward to when I had to come to Forks. On the other hand, I'd also fallen into
them a lot. Not a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. It reminded me of Edward's request —
that I not fall into the ocean.
Lauren was the one who made my decision for me. She didn't want to hike, and she was definitely
wearing the wrong shoes for it. Most of the other girls besides Angela and Jessica decided to stay on the
beach as well. I waited until Tyler and Eric had committed to remaining with them before I got up quietly
to join the pro-hiking group. Mike gave me a huge smile when he saw that I was coming.
The hike wasn't too long, though I hated to lose the sky in the woods. The green light of the forest was
strangely at odds with the adolescent laughter, too murky and ominous to be in harmony with the light
banter around me. I had to watch each step I took very carefully, avoiding roots below and branches
above, and I soon fell behind. Eventually I broke through the emerald confines of the forest and found the
rocky shore again. It was low tide, and a tidal river flowed past us on its way to the sea. Along its
pebbled banks, shallow pools that never completely drained were teeming with life.
I was very cautious not to lean too far over the little ocean ponds. The others were fearless, leaping over
the rocks, perching precariously on the edges. I found a very stable-looking rock on the fringe of one of
the largest pools and sat there cautiously, spellbound by the natural aquarium below me. The bouquets of
brilliant anemones undulated ceaselessly in the invisible current, twisted shells scurried about the edges,
obscuring the crabs within them, starfish stuck motionless to the rocks and each other, while one small
black eel with white racing stripes wove through the bright green weeds, waiting for the sea to return. I
was completely absorbed, except for one small part of my mind that wondered what Edward was doing
now, and trying to imagine what he would be saying if he were here with me.
Finally the boys were hungry, and I got up stiffly to follow them back. I tried to keep up better this time
through the woods, so naturally I fell a few times. I got some shallow scrapes on my palms, and the
knees of my jeans were stained green, but it could have been worse.
When we got back to First Beach, the group we'd left behind had multiplied. As we got closer we could
see the shining, straight black hair and copper skin of the newcomers, teenagers from the reservation
come to socialize.
The food was already being passed around, and the boys hurried to claim a share while Eric introduced
us as we each entered the driftwood circle. Angela and I were the last to arrive, and, as Eric said our
names, I noticed a younger boy sitting on the stones near the fire glance up at me in interest. I sat down
next to Angela, and Mike brought us sandwiches and an array of sodas to choose from, while a boy who
looked to be the oldest of the visitors rattled off the names of the seven others with him. All I caught was
that one of the girls was also named Jessica, and the boy who noticed me was named Jacob.
It was relaxing to sit with Angela; she was a restful kind of person to be around — she didn't feel the
need to fill every silence with chatter. She left me free to think undisturbed while we ate. And I was
thinking about how disjointedly time seemed to flow in Forks, passing in a blur at times, with single
images standing out more clearly than others. And then, at other times, every second was significant,
etched in my mind. I knew exactly what caused the difference, and it disturbed me.

During lunch the clouds started to advance, slinking across the blue sky, darting in front of the sun
momentarily, casting long shadows across the beach, and blackening the waves. As they finished eating,
people started to drift away in twos and threes. Some walked down to the edge of the waves, trying to
skip rocks across the choppy surface. Others were gathering a second expedition to the tide pools. Mike
— with Jessica shadowing him — headed up to the one shop in the village. Some of the local kids went
with them; others went along on the hike. By the time they all had scattered, I was sitting alone on my
driftwood log, with Lauren and Tyler occupying themselves by the CD player someone had thought to
bring, and three teenagers from the reservation perched around the circle, including the boy named Jacob
and the oldest boy who had acted as spokesperson.
A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her place by my side. He
looked fourteen, maybe fifteen, and had long, glossy black hair pulled back with a rubber band at the
nape of his neck. His skin was beautiful, silky and russet-colored; his eyes were dark, set deep above the
high planes of his cheekbones. He still had just a hint of childish roundness left around his chin.
Altogether, a very pretty face. However, my positive opinion of his looks was damaged by the first
words out of his mouth.
"You're Isabella Swan, aren't you?"
It was like the first day of school all over again.
"Bella," I sighed.
"I'm Jacob Black." He held his hand out in a friendly gesture. "You bought my dad's truck."
"Oh," I said, relieved, shaking his sleek hand. "You're Billy's son. I probably should remember you."
"No, I'm the youngest of the family — you would remember my older sisters."
"Rachel and Rebecca," I suddenly recalled. Charlie and Billy had thrown us together a lot during my
visits, to keep us busy while they fished. We were all too shy to make much progress as friends. Of
course, I'd kicked up enough tantrums to end the fishing trips by the time I was eleven.
"Are they here?" I examined the girls at the ocean's edge, wondering if I would recognize them now.
"No." Jacob shook his head. "Rachel got a scholarship to Washington State, and Rebecca married a
Samoan surfer — she lives in Hawaii now."
"Married. Wow." I was stunned. The twins were only a little over a year older than I was.
"So how do you like the truck?" he asked.
"I love it. It runs great."
"Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so relived when Charlie bought it. My dad wouldn't let me
work on building another car when we had a perfectly good vehicle right there."
"It's not that slow," I objected.
"Have you tried to go over sixty?"
"No," I admitted.
"Good. Don't." He grinned.

"You have goose bumps," he laughed delightedly.
"You're a good storyteller," I complimented him, still staring into the waves.
"Pretty crazy stuff, though, isn't it? No wonder my dad doesn't want us to talk about it to anyone."
I couldn't control my expression enough to look at him yet. "Don't worry, I won't give you away."
"I guess I just violated the treaty," he laughed.
"I'll take it to the grave," I promised, and then I shivered.
"Seriously, though, don't say anything to Charlie. He was pretty mad at my dad when he heard that some
of us weren't going to the hospital since Dr. Cullen started working there."
"I won't, of course not."
"So do you think we're a bunch of superstitious natives or what?" he asked in a playful tone, but with a
hint of worry. I still hadn't looked away from the ocean.
I turned and smiled at him as normally as I could.
"No. I think you're very good at telling scary stories, though. I still have goose bumps, see?" I held up my
arm.
"Cool." He smiled.
And then the sound of the beach rocks clattering against each other warned us that someone was
approaching. Our heads snapped up at the same time to see Mike and Jessica about fifty yards away,
walking toward us.
"There you are, Bella," Mike called in relief, waving his arm over his head.
"Is that your boyfriend?" Jacob asked, alerted by the jealous edge in Mike's voice. I was surprised it was
so obvious.
"No, definitely not," I whispered. I was tremendously grateful to Jacob, and eager to make him as happy
as possible. I winked at him, carefully turning away from Mike to do so. He smiled, elated by my inept
flirting.
"So when I get my license…" he began.
"You should come see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said this, knowing
that I'd used him. But I really did like Jacob. He was someone I could easily be friends with.
Mike had reached us now, with Jessica still a few paces back. I could see his eyes appraising Jacob, and
looking satisfied at his obvious youth.
"Where have you been?" he asked, though the answer was right in front of him.
"Jacob was just telling me some local stories," I volunteered. "It was really interesting."
I smiled at Jacob warmly, and he grinned back.
"Well," Mike paused, carefully reassessing the situation as he watched our camaraderie. "We're packing
up — it looks like it's going to rain soon."

We all looked up at the glowering sky. It certainly did look like rain.
"Okay." I jumped up. "I'm coming."
"It was nice to see you again," Jacob said, and I could tell he was taunting Mike just a bit.
"It really was. Next time Charlie comes down to see Billy, I'll come, too," I promised.
His grin stretched across his face. "That would be cool."
"And thanks," I added earnestly.
I pulled up my hood as we tramped across the rocks toward the parking lot. A few drops were
beginning to fall, making black spots on the stones where they landed. When we got to the Suburban the
others were already loading everything back in. I crawled into the backseat by Angela and Tyler,
announcing that I'd already had my turn in the shotgun position. Angela just stared out the window at the
escalating storm, and Lauren twisted around in the middle seat to occupy Tyler's attention, so I could
simply lay my head back on the seat and close my eyes and try very hard not to think.

"This way, Bella!" I recognized Mike's voice calling out of the gloomy heart of the trees, but I couldn't
see him.
"Why?" I asked, still pulling against Jacob's grasp, desperate now to find the sun.
But Jacob let go of my hand and yelped, suddenly shaking, falling to the dim forest floor. He twitched on
the ground as I watched in horror.
"Jacob!" I screamed. But he was gone. In his place was a large red-brown wolf with black eyes. The
wolf faced away from me, pointing toward the shore, the hair on the back of his shoulders bristling, low
growls issuing from between his exposed fangs.
"Bella, run!" Mike cried out again from behind me. But I didn't turn. I was watching a light coming toward
me from the beach.
And then Edward stepped out from the trees, his skin faintly glowing, his eyes black and dangerous. He
held up one hand and beckoned me to come to him. The wolf growled at my feet.
I took a step forward, toward Edward. He smiled then, and his teeth were sharp, pointed.
"Trust me," he purred.
I took another step.
The wolf launched himself across the space between me and the vampire, fangs aiming for the jugular.
"No!" I screamed, wrenching upright out of my bed.
My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player off the bedside table, and it clattered
to the wooden floor.
My light was still on, and I was sitting fully dressed on the bed, with my shoes on. I glanced, disoriented,
at the clock on my dresser. It was five-thirty in the morning.
I groaned, fell back, and rolled over onto my face, kicking off my boots. I was too uncomfortable to get
anywhere near sleep, though. I rolled back over and unbuttoned my jeans, yanking them off awkwardly
as I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of my
skull. I turned onto my side and ripped the rubber band out, quickly combing through the plaits with my
fingers. I pulled the pillow back over my eyes.
It was all no use, of course. My subconscious had dredged up exactly the images I'd been trying so
desperately to avoid. I was going to have to face them now.
I sat up, and my head spun for a minute as the blood flowed downward. First things first, I thought to
myself, happy to put it off as long as possible. I grabbed my bathroom bag.
The shower didn't last nearly as long as I hoped it would, though. Even taking the time to blow-dry my
hair, I was soon out of things to do in the bathroom. Wrapped in a towel, I crossed back to my room. I
couldn't tell if Charlie was still asleep, or if he had already left. I went to look out my window, and the
cruiser was gone. Fishing again.
I dressed slowly in my most comfy sweats and then made my bed — something I never did. I couldn't
put it off any longer. I went to my desk and switched on my old computer.
I hated using the Internet here. My modem was sadly outdated, my free service substandard; just dialing

same texture, as mine — had dwindled, slowly revealing more and more of the shiny skin of his forehead.
But when he smiled I could see a little of the man who had run away with Renée when she was just two
years older than I was now.
I ate breakfast cheerily, watching the dust moats stirring in the sunlight that streamed in the back window.
Charlie called out a goodbye, and I heard the cruiser pull away from the house. I hesitated on my way
out the door, hand on my rain jacket. It would be tempting fate to leave it home. With a sigh, I folded it
over my arm and stepped out into the brightest light I'd seen in months.
By dint of much elbow grease, I was able to get both windows in the truck almost completely rolled
down. I was one of the first ones to school; I hadn't even checked the clock in my hurry to get outside. I
parked and headed toward the seldom-used picnic benches on the south side of the cafeteria. The
benches were still a little damp, so I sat on my jacket, glad to have a use for it. My homework was done
— the product of a slow social life — but there were a few Trig problems I wasn't sure I had right. I
took out my book industriously, but halfway through rechecking the first problem I was daydreaming,
watching the sunlight play on the red-barked trees. I sketched inattentively along the margins of my
homework. After a few minutes, I suddenly realized I'd drawn five pairs of dark eyes staring out of the
page at me. I scrubbed them out with the eraser.
"Bella!" I heard someone call, and it sounded like Mike.
I looked around to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting there,
absentminded. Everyone was in t-shirts, some even in shorts though the temperature couldn't be over
sixty. Mike was coming toward me in khaki shorts and a striped Rugby shirt, waving.
"Hey, Mike," I called, waving back, unable to be halfhearted on a morning like this.
He came to sit by me, the tidy spikes of his hair shining golden in the light, his grin stretching across his
face. He was so delighted to see me, I couldn't help but feel gratified.
"I never noticed before — your hair has red in it," he commented, catching between his fingers a strand
that was fluttering in the light breeze.
"Only in the sun."
I became just a little uncomfortable as he tucked the lock behind my ear.
"Great day, isn't it?"
"My kind of day," I agreed.
"What did you do yesterday?" His tone was just a bit too proprietary.
"I mostly worked on my essay." I didn't add that I was finished with it — no need to sound smug.
He hit his forehead with the heel of his hand. "Oh yeah — that's due Thursday, right?"
"Um, Wednesday, I think."
"Wednesday?" He frowned. "That's not good… What are you writing yours on?"
"Whether Shakespeare's treatment of the female characters is misogynistic."
He stared at me like I'd just spoken in pig Latin.

"I guess I'll have to get to work on that tonight," he said, deflated. "I was going to ask if you wanted to go
out."
"Oh." I was taken off guard. Why couldn't I ever have a pleasant conversation with Mike anymore
without it getting awkward?
"Well, we could go to dinner or something… and I could work on it later." He smiled at me hopefully.
"Mike…" I hated being put on the spot. "I don't think that would be the best idea."
His face fell. "Why?" he asked, his eyes guarded. My thoughts flickered to Edward, wondering if that's
where his thoughts were as well.
"I think… and if you ever repeat what I'm saying right now I will cheerfully beat you to death," I
threatened, "but I think that would hurt Jessica's feelings."
He was bewildered, obviously not thinking in that direction at all. "Jessica?"
"Really, Mike, are you blind?"
"Oh," he exhaled — clearly dazed. I took advantage of that to make my escape.
"It's time for class, and I can't be late again." I gathered my books up and stuffed them in my bag.
We walked in silence to building three, and his expression was distracted. I hoped whatever thoughts he
was immersed in were leading him in the right direction.
When I saw Jessica in Trig, she was bubbling with enthusiasm. She, Angela, and Lauren were going to
Port Angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the dance, and she wanted me to come, too, even though I
didn't need one. I was indecisive. It would be nice to get out of town with some girlfriends, but Lauren
would be there. And who knew what I could be doing tonight… But that was definitely the wrong path
to let my mind wander down. Of course I was happy about the sunlight. But that wasn't completely
responsible for the euphoric mood I was in, not even close.
So I gave her a maybe, telling her I'd have to talk with Charlie first.
She talked of nothing but the dance on the way to Spanish, continuing as if without an interruption when
class finally ended, five minutes late, and we were on our way to lunch. I was far too lost in my own
frenzy of anticipation to notice much of what she said. I was painfully eager to see not just him but all the
Cullens — to compare them with the new suspicions that plagued my mind. As I crossed the threshold of
the cafeteria, I felt the first true tingle of fear slither down my spine and settle in my stomach. Would they
be able to know what I was thinking? And then a different feeling jolted through me — would Edward be
waiting to sit with me again?
As was my routine, I glanced first toward the Cullens' table. A shiver of panic trembled in my stomach as
I realized it was empty. With dwindling hope, my eyes scoured the rest of the cafeteria, hoping to find
him alone, waiting for me. The place was nearly filled — Spanish had made us late — but there was no
sign of Edward or any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength.
I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore.
We were late enough that everyone was already at our table. I avoided the empty chair next to Mike in
favor of one by Angela. I vaguely noticed that Mike held the chair out politely for Jessica, and that her
face lit up in response.

Angela asked a few quiet questions about the Macbeth paper, which I answered as naturally as I could
while spiraling downward in misery. She, too, invited me to go with them tonight, and I agreed now,
grasping at anything to distract myself.
I realized I'd been holding on to a last shred of hope when I entered Biology, saw his empty seat, and felt
a new wave of disappointment.
The rest of the day passed slowly, dismally. In Gym, we had a lecture on the rules of badminton, the next
torture they had lined up for me. But at least it meant I got to sit and listen instead of stumbling around on
the court. The best part was the coach didn't finish, so I got another day off tomorrow. Never mind that
the day after they would arm me with a racket before unleashing me on the rest of the class.
I was glad to leave campus, so I would be free to pout and mope before I went out tonight with Jessica
and company. But right after I walked in the door of Charlie's house, Jessica called to cancel our plans. I
tried to be happy that Mike had asked her out to dinner — I really was relieved that he finally seemed to
be catching on — but my enthusiasm sounded false in my own ears. She rescheduled our shopping trip
for tomorrow night.
Which left me with little in the way of distractions. I had fish marinating for dinner, with a salad and bread
left over from the night before, so there was nothing to do there. I spent a focused half hour on
homework, but then I was through with that, too. I checked my e-mail, reading the backlog of letters
from my mother, getting snippier as they progressed to the present. I sighed and typed a quick response.

Jess drove faster than the Chief, so we made it to Port Angeles by four. It had been a while since I'd had
a girls' night out, and the estrogen rush was invigorating. We listened to whiny rock songs while Jessica
jabbered on about the boys we hung out with. Jessica's dinner with Mike had gone very well, and she
was hoping that by Saturday night they would have progressed to the first-kiss stage. I smiled to myself,
pleased. Angela was passively happy to be going to the dance, but not really interested in Eric. Jess tried
to get her to confess who her type was, but I interrupted with a question about dresses after a bit, to
spare her. Angela threw a grateful glance my way.
Port Angeles was a beautiful little tourist trap, much more polished and quaint than Forks. But Jessica
and Angela knew it well, so they didn't plan to waste time on the picturesque boardwalk by the bay. Jess
drove straight to the one big department store in town, which was a few streets in from the bay area's
visitor-friendly face.
The dance was billed as semiformal, and we weren't exactly sure what that meant. Both Jessica and
Angela seemed surprised and almost disbelieving when I told them I'd never been to a dance in Phoenix.
"Didn't you ever go with a boyfriend or something?" Jess asked dubiously as we walked through the front
doors of the store.
"Really," I tried to convince her, not wanting to confess my dancing problems. "I've never had a boyfriend
or anything close. I didn't go out much."
"Why not?" Jessica demanded.
"No one asked me," I answered honestly.
She looked skeptical. "People ask you out here," she reminded me, "and you tell them no." We were in
the juniors' section now, scanning the racks for dress-up clothes.

from the stone his skin resembled.
Finally he looked up, his eyes seeking mine, full of his own questions.
"Are you ready to go home?" he asked.
"I'm ready to leave," I qualified, overly grateful that we had the hour-long ride home together. I wasn't
ready to say goodbye to him.
The waitress appeared as if she'd been called. Or watching.
"How are we doing?" she asked Edward.
"We're ready for the check, thank you." His voice was quiet, rougher, still reflecting the strain of our
conversation. It seemed to muddle her. He looked up, waiting.
"S-sure," she stuttered. "Here you go." She pulled a small leather folder from the front pocket of her
black apron and handed it to him.
There was a bill in his hand already. He slipped it into the folder and handed it right back to her.
"No change." He smiled. Then he stood up, and I scrambled awkwardly to my feet.
She smiled invitingly at him again. "You have a nice evening."
He didn't look away from me as he thanked her. I suppressed a smile.
He walked close beside me to the door, still careful not to touch me. I remembered what Jessica had
said about her relationship with Mike, how they were almost to the first-kiss stage. I sighed. Edward
seemed to hear me, and he looked down curiously. I looked at the sidewalk, grateful that he didn't seem
to be able to know what I was thinking.
He opened the passenger door, holding it for me as I stepped in, shutting it softly behind me. I watched
him walk around the front of the car, amazed, yet again, by how graceful he was. I probably should have
been used to that by now — but I wasn't. I had a feeling Edward wasn't the kind of person anyone got
used to.
Once inside the car, he started the engine and turned the heater on high. It had gotten very cold, and I
guessed the good weather was at an end. I was warm in his jacket, though, breathing in the scent of it
when I thought he couldn't see.
Edward pulled out through the traffic, apparently without a glance, flipping around to head toward the
freeway.
"Now," he said significantly, "it's your turn."

"I can't," he said, startled. Then understanding brightened his eyes. "However, I can read hers — she'll be
waiting to ambush you in class."
I groaned as I pulled off his jacket and handed it to him, replacing it with my own. He folded it over his
arm.
"So what are you going to tell her?"
"A little help?" I pleaded. "What does she want to know?"
He shook his head, grinning wickedly. "That's not fair."
"No, you not sharing what you know — now that's not fair."
He deliberated for a moment as we walked. We stopped outside the door to my first class.
"She wants to know if we're secretly dating. And she wants to know how you feel about me," he finally
said.
"Yikes. What should I say?" I tried to keep my expression very innocent. People were passing us on their
way to class, probably staring, but I was barely aware of them.
"Hmmm." He paused to catch a stray lock of hair that was escaping the twist on my neck and wound it
back into place. My heart spluttered hyperactively. "I suppose you could say yes to the first… if you
don't mind — it's easier than any other explanation."
"I don't mind," I said in a faint voice.
"And as for her other question… well, I'll be listening to hear the answer to that one myself." One side of
his mouth pulled up into my favorite uneven smile. I couldn't catch my breath soon enough to respond to
that remark. He turned and walked away.
"I'll see you at lunch," he called over his shoulder. Three people walking in the door stopped to stare at
me.
I hurried into class, flushed and irritated. He was such a cheater. Now I was even more worried about
what I was going to say to Jessica. I sat in my usual seat, slamming my bag down in aggravation.
"Morning, Bella," Mike said from the seat next to me. I looked up to see an odd, almost resigned look on
his face. "How was Port Angeles?"
"It was…" There was no honest way to sum it up. "Great," I finished lamely. "Jessica got a really cute
dress."
"Did she say anything about Monday night?" he asked, his eyes brightening. I smiled at the turn the
conversation had taken.
"She said she had a really good time," I assured him.
"She did?" he said eagerly.
"Most definitely."
Mr. Mason called the class to order then, asking us to turn in our papers. English and then Government
passed in a blur, while I worried about how to explain things to Jessica and agonized over whether

She didn't get a chance to start on the subject again during class, and as soon as the bell rang, I took
evasive action.
"In English, Mike asked me if you said anything about Monday night," I told her.
"You're kidding! What did you say?!" she gasped, completely sidetracked.
"I told him you said you had a lot of fun — he looked pleased."
"Tell me exactly what he said, and your exact answer!"
We spent the rest of the walk dissecting sentence structures and most of Spanish on a minute description
of Mike's facial expressions. I wouldn't have helped draw it out for as long as I did if I wasn't worried
about the subject returning to me.
And then the bell rang for lunch. As I jumped up out of my seat, shoving my books roughly in my bag,
my uplifted expression must have tipped Jessica off.
"You're not sitting with us today, are you?" she guessed.
"I don't think so." I couldn't be sure that he wouldn't disappear inconveniently again.
But outside the door to our Spanish class, leaning against the wall — looking more like a Greek god than
anyone had a right to — Edward was waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and
departed.
"See you later, Bella." Her voice was thick with implications. I might have to turn off the ringer on the
phone.
"Hello." His voice was amused and irritated at the same time. He had been listening, it was obvious.
"Hi."
I couldn't think of anything else to say, and he didn't speak — biding his time, I presumed — so it was a
quiet walk to the cafeteria. Walking with Edward through the crowded lunchtime rush was a lot like my
first day here; everyone stared.
He led the way into the line, still not speaking, though his eyes returned to my face every few seconds,
their expression speculative. It seemed to me that irritation was winning out over amusement as the
dominant emotion in his face. I fidgeted nervously with the zipper on my jacket.
He stepped up to the counter and filled a tray with food.
"What are you doing?" I objected. "You're not getting all that for me?"
He shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food.
"Half is for me, of course."
I raised one eyebrow.
He led the way to the same place we'd sat that one time before. From the other end of the long table, a
group of seniors gazed at us in amazement as we sat across from each other. Edward seemed oblivious.
"Take whatever you want," he said, pushing the tray toward me.

direction, but he never seemed to relax, either. The overpowering craving to touch him also refused to
fade, and I crushed my fists safely against my ribs until my fingers were aching with the effort.
I breathed a sigh of relief when Mr. Banner flicked the lights back on at the end of class, and stretched
my arms out in front of me, flexing my stiff fingers. Edward chuckled beside me.
"Well, that was interesting," he murmured. His voice was dark and his eyes were cautious.
"Umm," was all I was able to respond.
"Shall we?" he asked, rising fluidly.
I almost groaned. Time for Gym. I stood with care, worried my balance might have been affected by the
strange new intensity between us.
He walked me to my next class in silence and paused at the door; I turned to say goodbye. His face
startled me — his expression was torn, almost pained, and so fiercely beautiful that the ache to touch him
flared as strong as before. My goodbye stuck in my throat.
He raised his hand, hesitant, conflict raging in his eyes, and then swiftly brushed the length of my
cheekbone with his fingertips. His skin was as icy as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin was
alarmingly warm — like I'd been burned, but didn't feel the pain of it yet.
He turned without a word and strode quickly away from me.
I walked into the gym, lightheaded and wobbly. I drifted to the locker room, changing in a trancelike
state, only vaguely aware that there were other people surrounding me. Reality didn't fully set in until I
was handed a racket. It wasn't heavy, yet it felt very unsafe in my hand. I could see a few of the other
kids in class eyeing me furtively. Coach Clapp ordered us to pair up into teams.
Mercifully, some vestiges of Mike's chivalry still survived; he came to stand beside me.
"Do you want to be a team?"
"Thanks, Mike — you don't have to do this, you know." I grimaced apologetically.
"Don't worry, I'll keep out of your way." He grinned. Sometimes it was so easy to like Mike.
It didn't go smoothly. I somehow managed to hit myself in the head with my racket and clip Mike's
shoulder on the same swing. I spent the rest of the hour in the back corner of the court, the racket held
safely behind my back. Despite being handicapped by me, Mike was pretty good; he won three games
out of four singlehandedly. He gave me an unearned high five when the coach finally blew the whistle
ending class.
"So," he said as we walked off the court.
"So what?"
"You and Cullen, huh?" he asked, his tone rebellious. My previous feeling of affection disappeared.
"That's none of your business, Mike," I warned, internally cursing Jessica straight to the fiery pits of
Hades.
"I don't like it," he muttered anyway.

"You don't have to," I snapped.
"He looks at you like… like you're something to eat," he continued, ignoring me.
I choked back the hysteria that threatened to explode, but a small giggle managed to get out despite my
efforts. He glowered at me. I waved and fled to the locker room.
I dressed quickly, something stronger than butterflies battering recklessly against the walls of my stomach,
my argument with Mike already a distant memory. I was wondering if Edward would be waiting, or if I
should meet him at his car. What if his family was there? I felt a wave of real terror. Did they know that I
knew? Was I supposed to know that they knew that I knew, or not?
By the time I walked out of the gym, I had just about decided to walk straight home without even looking
toward the parking lot. But my worries were unnecessary. Edward was waiting, leaning casually against
the side of the gym, his breathtaking face untroubled now. As I walked to his side, I felt a peculiar sense
of release.
"Hi," I breathed, smiling hugely.
"Hello." His answering smile was brilliant. "How was Gym?"
My face fell a tiny bit. "Fine," I lied.
"Really?" He was unconvinced. His eyes shifted their focus slightly, looking over my shoulder and
narrowing. I glanced behind me to see Mike's back as he walked away.
"What?" I demanded.
His eyes slid back to mine, still tight. "Newton's getting on my nerves."
"You weren't listening again?" I was horror-struck. All traces of my sudden good humor vanished.
"How's your head?" he asked innocently.
"You're unbelievable!" I turned, stomping away in the general direction of the parking lot, though I hadn't
ruled out walking at this point.
He kept up with me easily.
"You were the one who mentioned how I'd never seen you in Gym — it made me curious." He didn't
sound repentant, so I ignored him.
We walked in silence — a furious, embarrassed silence on my part — to his car. But I had to stop a few
steps away — a crowd of people, all boys, were surrounding it.
Then I realized they weren't surrounding the Volvo, they were actually circled around Rosalie's red
convertible, unmistakable lust in their eyes. None of them even looked up as Edward slid between them
to open his door. I climbed quickly in the passenger side, also unnoticed.
"Ostentatious," he muttered.
"What kind of car is that?" I asked.
"An M3."

But his pause was very short.
"What kinds of flowers do you prefer?" he fired off.
I sighed in relief, and continued with the psychoanalysis.
Biology was a complication again. Edward had continued with his quizzing up until Mr. Banner entered
the room, dragging the audiovisual frame again. As the teacher approached the light switch, I noticed
Edward slide his chair slightly farther away from mine. It didn't help. As soon as the room was dark,
there was the same electric spark, the same restless craving to stretch my hand across the short space
and touch his cold skin, as yesterday.
I leaned forward on the table, resting my chin on my folded arms, my hidden fingers gripping the table's
edge as I fought to ignore the irrational longing that unsettled me. I didn't look at him, afraid that if he was
looking at me, it would only make self-control that much harder. I sincerely tried to watch the movie, but
at the end of the hour I had no idea what I'd just seen. I sighed in relief again when Mr. Banner turned the
lights on, finally glancing at Edward; he was looking at me, his eyes ambivalent.
He rose in silence and then stood still, waiting for me. We walked toward the gym in silence, like
yesterday. And, also like yesterday, he touched my face wordlessly — this time with the back of his cool
hand, stroking once from my temple to my jaw — before he turned and walked away.
Gym passed quickly as I watched Mike's one-man badminton show. He didn't speak to me today, either
in response to my vacant expression or because he was still angry about our squabble yesterday.
Somewhere, in a corner of my mind, I felt bad about that. But I couldn't concentrate on him.
I hurried to change afterward, ill at ease, knowing the faster I moved, the sooner I would be with
Edward. The pressure made me more clumsy than usual, but eventually I made it out the door, feeling the
same release when I saw him standing there, a wide smile automatically spreading across my face. He
smiled in reaction before launching into more cross-examination.
His questions were different now, though, not as easily answered. He wanted to know what I missed
about home, insisting on descriptions of anything he wasn't familiar with. We sat in front of Charlie's
house for hours, as the sky darkened and rain plummeted around us in a sudden deluge.
I tried to describe impossible things like the scent of creosote — bitter, slightly resinous, but still pleasant
— the high, keening sound of the cicadas in July, the feathery barrenness of the trees, the very size of the
sky, extending white-blue from horizon to horizon, barely interrupted by the low mountains covered with
purple volcanic rock. The hardest thing to explain was why it was so beautiful to me — to justify a
beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that had
more to do with the exposed shape of the land, with the shallow bowls of valleys between the craggy
hills, and the way they held on to the sun. I found myself using my hands as I tried to describe it to him.
His quiet, probing questions kept me talking freely, forgetting, in the dim light of the storm, to be
embarrassed for monopolizing the conversation. Finally, when I had finished detailing my cluttered room
at home, he paused instead of responding with another question.
"Are you finished?" I asked in relief.
"Not even close — but your father will be home soon."
"Charlie!" I suddenly recalled his existence, and sighed. I looked out at the rain-darkened sky, but it gave
nothing away. "How late is it?" I wondered out loud as I glanced at the clock. I was surprised by the time

"Superstitious old man," Jacob muttered under his breath.
"You don't think he'd say anything to Charlie?" I couldn't help asking, the words coming out in a low
rush.
Jacob stared at me for a moment, and I couldn't read the expression in his dark eyes. "I doubt it," he
finally answered. "I think Charlie chewed him out pretty good last time. They haven't spoken much since
— tonight is sort of a reunion, I think. I don't think he'd bring it up again."
"Oh," I said, trying to sound indifferent.
I stayed in the front room after I carried the food out to Charlie, pretending to watch the game while
Jacob chattered at me. I was really listening to the men's conversation, watching for any sign that Billy
was about to rat me out, trying to think of ways to stop him if he began.
It was a long night. I had a lot of homework that was going undone, but I was afraid to leave Billy alone
with Charlie. Finally, the game ended.
"Are you and your friends coming back to the beach soon?" Jacob asked as he pushed his father over
the lip of the threshold.
"I'm not sure," I hedged.
"That was fun, Charlie," Billy said.
"Come up for the next game," Charlie encouraged.
"Sure, sure," Billy said. "We'll be here. Have a good night." His eyes shifted to mine, and his smile
disappeared. "You take care, Bella," he added seriously.
"Thanks," I muttered, looking away.
I headed for the stairs while Charlie waved from the doorway.
"Wait, Bella," he said.
I cringed. Had Billy gotten something in before I'd joined them in the living room?
But Charlie was relaxed, still grinning from the unexpected visit.
"I didn't get a chance to talk to you tonight. How was your day?"
"Good." I hesitated with one foot on the first stair, searching for details I could safely share. "My
badminton team won all four games."
"Wow, I didn't know you could play badminton."
"Well, actually I can't, but my partner is really good," I admitted.
"Who is it?" he asked with token interest.
"Um… Mike Newton," I told him reluctantly.
"Oh yeah — you said you were friends with the Newton kid." He perked up. "Nice family." He mused
for a minute. "Why didn't you ask him to the dance this weekend?"

touch my face, lightly brushing along my cheekbone again. Then he turned and walked away. I stared
after him until he was gone.
I was sorely tempted to ditch the rest of the day, at the very least Gym, but a warning instinct stopped
me. I knew that if I disappeared now, Mike and others would assume I was with Edward. And Edward
was worried about the time we'd spent together publicly… if things went wrong. I refused to dwell on the
last thought, concentrating instead on making things safer for him.
I intuitively knew — and sensed he did, too — that tomorrow would be pivotal. Our relationship couldn't
continue to balance, as it did, on the point of a knife. We would fall off one edge or the other, depending
entirely upon his decision, or his instincts. My decision was made, made before I'd ever consciously
chosen, and I was committed to seeing it through. Because there was nothing more terrifying to me, more
excruciating, than the thought of turning away from him. It was an impossibility.
I went to class, feeling dutiful. I couldn't honestly say what happened in Biology; my mind was too
preoccupied with thoughts of tomorrow. In Gym, Mike was speaking to me again; he wished me a good
time in Seattle. I carefully explained that I'd canceled my trip, worried about my truck.
"Are you going to the dance with Cullen?" he asked, suddenly sulky.
"No, I'm not going to the dance at all."
"What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested.
My natural urge was to tell him to butt out. Instead, I lied brightly.
"Laundry, and then I have to study for the Trig test or I'm going to fail."
"Is Cullen helping you study?"
"Edward," I emphasized, "is not going to help me study. He's gone away somewhere for the weekend."
The lies came more naturally than usual, I noted with surprise.
"Oh." He perked up. "You know, you could come to the dance with our group anyway — that would be
cool. We'd all dance with you," he promised.
The mental image of Jessica's face made my tone sharper than necessary.
"I'm not going to the dance, Mike, okay?"
"Fine." He sulked again. "I was just offering."
When the school day had finally ended, I walked to the parking lot without enthusiasm. I did not
especially want to walk home, but I couldn't see how he would have retrieved my truck. Then again, I
was starting to believe that nothing was impossible for him. The latter instinct proved correct — my truck
sat in the same space he'd parked his Volvo in this morning. I shook my head, incredulous, as I opened
the unlocked door and saw the key in the ignition.
There was a piece of white paper folded on my seat. I got in and closed the door before I unfolded it.
Two words were written in his elegant script.

The sound of the truck roaring to life frightened me. I laughed at myself.
When I got home, the handle of the door was locked, the dead bolt unlocked, just as I'd left it this
morning. Inside, I went straight to the laundry room. It looked just the same as I'd left it, too. I dug for
my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I
thought, shaking my head.
Following the same instinct that had prompted me to lie to Mike, I called Jessica on the pretense of
wishing her luck at the dance. When she offered the same wish for my day with Edward, I told her about
the cancellation. She was more disappointed than really necessary for a third-party observer to be. I said
goodbye quickly after that.
Charlie was absentminded at dinner, worried over something at work, I guessed, or maybe a basketball
game, or maybe he was just really enjoying the lasagna — it was hard to tell with Charlie.
"You know, Dad…" I began, breaking into his reverie.
"What's that, Bell?"
"I think you're right about Seattle. I think I'll wait until Jessica or someone else can go with me."
"Oh," he said, surprised. "Oh, okay. So, do you want me to stay home?"
"No, Dad, don't change your plans. I've got a million things to do… homework, laundry… I need to go
to the library and the grocery store. I'll be in and out all day… you go and have fun."
"Are you sure?"
"Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe
three years' supply."
"You're sure easy to live with, Bella." He smiled.
"I could say the same thing about you," I said, laughing. The sound of my laughter was off, but he didn't
seem to notice. I felt so guilty for deceiving him that I almost took Edward's advice and told him where I
would be. Almost.
After dinner, I folded clothes and moved another load through the dryer. Unfortunately it was the kind of
job that only keeps hands busy. My mind definitely had too much free time, and it was getting out of
control. I fluctuated between anticipation so intense that it was very nearly pain, and an insidious fear that
picked at my resolve. I had to keep reminding myself that I'd made my choice, and I wasn't going back
on it. I pulled his note out of my pocket much more often than necessary to absorb the two small words
he'd written. He wants me to be safe, I told myself again and again. I would just hold on to the faith that,
in the end, that desire would win out over the others. And what was my other choice — to cut him out of
my life? Intolerable. Besides, since I'd come to Forks, it really seemed like my life was about him.
But a tiny voice in the back of my mind worried, wondering if it would hurt very much… if it ended
badly.
I was relieved when it was late enough to be acceptable for bedtime. I knew I was far too stressed to
sleep, so I did something I'd never done before. I deliberately took unnecessary cold medicine — the
kind that knocked me out for a good eight hours. I normally wouldn't condone that type of behavior in
myself, but tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on
top of everything else. While I waited for the drugs to kick in, I dried my clean hair till it was impeccably

"No, Dad, I just want to get some sleep."
"None of the boys in town your type, eh?" He was suspicious, but trying to play it cool.
"No, none of the boys have caught my eye yet." I was careful not to over-emphasize the word boys in
my quest to be truthful with Charlie.
"I thought maybe that Mike Newton… you said he was friendly."
"He's Just a friend, Dad."
"Well, you're too good for them all, anyway. Wait till you get to college to start looking." Every father's
dream, that his daughter will be out of the house before the hormones kick in.
"Sounds like a good idea to me," I agreed as I headed up the stairs.
"'Night, honey," he called after me. No doubt he would be listening carefully all evening, waiting for me to
try to sneak out.
"See you in the morning, Dad." See you creeping into my room tonight at midnight to check on me.
I worked to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked up the stairs to my room. I shut the door
loud enough for him to hear, and then sprinted on my tiptoes to the window. I threw it open and leaned
out into the night. My eyes scanned the darkness, the impenetrable shadows of the trees.
"Edward?" I whispered, feeling completely idiotic.
The quiet, laughing response came from behind me. "Yes?"
I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise.
He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture
of ease.
"Oh!" I breathed, sinking unsteadily to the floor.
"I'm sorry." He pressed his lips together, trying to hide his amusement.
"Just give me a minute to restart my heart."
He sat up slowly, so as not to startle me again. Then he leaned forward and reached out with his long
arms to pick me up, gripping the tops of my arms like I was a toddler. He sat me on the bed beside him.
"Why don't you sit with me," he suggested, putting a cold hand on mine. "How's the heart?"
"You tell me — I'm sure you hear it better than I do."
I felt his quiet laughter shake the bed.
We sat there for a moment in silence, both listening to my heartbeat slow. I thought about having Edward
in my room, with my father in the house.
"Can I have a minute to be human?" I asked.
"Certainly." He gestured with one hand that I should proceed.

"Not unforgivable," I disagreed.
"Thank you." He smiled. "You see," he continued, looking down now, "I wasn't sure if I was strong
enough…" He picked up one of my hands and pressed it lightly to his face. "And while there was still that
possibility that I might be… overcome" — he breathed in the scent at my wrist — "I was… susceptible.
Until I made up my mind that I was strong enough, that there was no possibility at all that I would… that
I ever could…"
I'd never seen him struggle so hard for words. It was so… human.
"So there's no possibility now?"
"Mind over matter," he repeated, smiling, his teeth bright even in the darkness.
"Wow, that was easy," I said.
He threw back his head and laughed, quietly as a whisper, but still exuberantly.
"Easy for you!" he amended, touching my nose with his fingertip.
And then his face was abruptly serious.
"I'm trying," he whispered, his voice pained. "If it gets to be… too much, I'm fairly sure I'll be able to
leave."
I scowled. I didn't like the talk of leaving.
"And it will be harder tomorrow," he continued. "I've had the scent of you in my head all day, and I've
grown amazingly desensitized. If I'm away from you for any length of time, I'll have to start over again.
Not quite from scratch, though, I think."
"Don't go away, then," I responded, unable to hide the longing in my voice.
"That suits me," he replied, his face relaxing into a gentle smile. "Bring on the shackles — I'm your
prisoner." But his long hands formed manacles around my wrists as he spoke. He laughed his quiet,
musical laugh. He'd laughed more tonight than I'd ever heard in all the time I'd spent with him.
"You seem more… optimistic than usual," I observed. "I haven't seen you like this before."
"Isn't it supposed to be like this?" He smiled. "The glory of first love, and all that. It's incredible, isn't it,
the difference between reading about something, seeing it in the pictures, and experiencing it?"
"Very different," I agreed. "More forceful than I'd imagined."
"For example" — his words flowed swiftly now, I had to concentrate to catch it all — "the emotion of
jealousy. I've read about it a hundred thousand times, seen actors portray it in a thousand different plays
and movies. I believed I understood that one pretty clearly. But it shocked me…" He grimaced. "Do you
remember the day that Mike asked you to the dance?"
I nodded, though I remembered that day for a different reason. "The day you started talking to me again."
"I was surprised by the flare of resentment, almost fury, that I felt — I didn't recognize what it was at
first. I was even more aggravated than usual that I couldn't know what you were thinking, why you
refused him. Was it simply for your friend's sake? Was there someone else? I knew I had no right to care
either way. I tried not to care.

"And then the line started forming," he chuckled. I scowled in the darkness.
"I waited, unreasonably anxious to hear what you would say to them, to watch your expressions. I
couldn't deny the relief I felt, watching the annoyance on your face. But I couldn't be sure.
"That was the first night I came here. I wrestled all night, while watching you sleep, with the chasm
between what I knew was right, moral, ethical, and what I wanted. I knew that if I continued to ignore
you as I should, or if I left for a few years, till you were gone, that someday you would say yes to Mike,
or someone like him. It made me angry.
"And then," he whispered, "as you were sleeping, you said my name. You spoke so clearly, at first I
thought you'd woken. But you rolled over restlessly and mumbled my name once more, and sighed. The
feeling that coursed through me then was unnerving, staggering. And I knew I couldn't ignore you any
longer." He was silent for a moment, probably listening to the suddenly uneven pounding of my heart.
"But jealousy… it's a strange thing. So much more powerful than I would have thought. And irrational!
Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton…" He shook his head angrily.
"I should have known you'd be listening," I groaned.
"Of course."
"That made you feel jealous, though, really?"
"I'm new at this; you're resurrecting the human in me, and everything feels stronger because it's fresh."
"But honestly," I teased, "for that to bother you, after I have to hear that Rosalie — Rosalie, the
incarnation of pure beauty, Rosalie — was meant for you. Emmett or no Emmett, how can I compete
with that?"
"There's no competition." His teeth gleamed. He drew my trapped hands around his back, holding me to
his chest. I kept as still as I could, even breathing with caution.
"I know there's no competition," I mumbled into his cold skin. "That's the problem."
"Of course Rosalie is beautiful in her way, but even if she wasn't like a sister to me, even if Emmett didn't
belong with her, she could never have one tenth, no, one hundredth of the attraction you hold for me." He
was serious now, thoughtful. "For almost ninety years I've walked among my kind, and yours… all the
time thinking I was complete in myself, not realizing what I was seeking. And not finding anything,
because you weren't alive yet."
"It hardly seems fair," I whispered, my face still resting on his chest, listening to his breath come and go. "I
haven't had to wait at all. Why should I get off so easily?"
"You're right," he agreed with amusement. "I should make this harder for you, definitely." He freed one of
his hands, released my wrist, only to gather it carefully into his other hand. He stroked my wet hair softly,
from the top of my head to my waist. "You only have to risk your life every second you spend with me,
that's surely not much. You only have to turn your back on nature, on humanity… what's that worth?"
"Very little — I don't feel deprived of anything."
"Not yet." And his voice was abruptly full of ancient grief.
I tried to pull back, to look in his face, but his hand locked my wrists in an unbreakable hold.

I tried on a couple of different tops, not sure what to expect tonight. As I concentrated on what was
coming, what had just passed became insignificant. Now that I was removed from Jasper's and Edward's
influence, I began to make up for not being terrified before. I gave up quickly on choosing an outfit —
throwing on an old flannel shirt and jeans — knowing I would be in my raincoat all night anyway.
The phone rang and I sprinted downstairs to get it. There was only one voice I wanted to hear; anything
else would be a disappointment. But I knew that if he wanted to talk to me, he'd probably just
materialize in my room.
"Hello?" I asked, breathless.
"Bella? It's me," Jessica said.
"Oh, hey, Jess." I scrambled for a moment to come back down to reality. It felt like months rather than
days since I'd spoken to Jess. "How was the dance?"
"It was so much fun!" Jessica gushed. Needing no more invitation than that, she launched into a
minute-by-minute account of the previous night. I mmm'd and ahh'd at the right places, but it wasn't easy
to concentrate. Jessica, Mike, the dance, the school — they all seemed strangely irrelevant at the
moment. My eyes kept flashing to the window, trying to judge the degree of light behind the heavy
clouds.
"Did you hear what I said, Bella?" Jess asked, irritated.
"I'm sorry, what?"
"I said, Mike kissed me! Can you believe it?"
"That's wonderful, Jess," I said.
"So what did you do yesterday?" Jessica challenged, still sounding bothered by my lack of attention. Or
maybe she was upset because I hadn't asked for details.
"Nothing, really. I just hung around outside to enjoy the sun."
I heard Charlie's car in the garage.
"Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?"
The front door slammed and I could hear Charlie banging around under the stairs, putting his tackle
away.
"Um." I hesitated, not sure what my story was anymore.
"Hi there, kiddo!" Charlie called as he walked into the kitchen. I waved at him.
Jess heard his voice. "Oh, your dad's there. Never mind — we'll talk tomorrow. See you in Trig."
"See ya, Jess." I hung up the phone.
"Hey, Dad," I said. He was scrubbing his hands in the sink. "Where's the fish?"
"I put it out in the freezer."
"I'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze — Billy dropped off some of Harry Clearwater's fish fry this

"Oh. Well, I forgive you."
"Thanks. But there's something else." Edward frowned.
I waited patiently.
"He called you pretty," he finally continued, his frown deepening. "That's practically an insult, the way
you look right now. You're much more than beautiful."
I laughed. "You might be a little biased."
"I don't think that's it. Besides, I have excellent eyesight."
We were twirling again, my feet on his as he held me close.
"So are you going to explain the reason for all of this?" I wondered.
He looked down at me, confused, and I glared meaningfully at the crepe paper.
He considered for a moment, and then changed direction, spinning me through the crowd to the back
door of the gym. I caught a glimpse of Jessica and Mike dancing, staring at me curiously. Jessica waved,
and I smiled back quickly. Angela was there, too, looking blissfully happy in the arms of little Ben
Cheney; she didn't look up from his eyes, a head lower than hers. Lee and Samantha, Lauren, glaring
toward us, with Conner; I could name every face that spiraled past me. And then we were outdoors, in
the cool, dim light of a fading sunset.
As soon as we were alone, he swung me up into his arms, and carried me across the dark grounds till he
reached the bench beneath the shadow of the madrone trees. He sat there, keeping me cradled against
his chest. The moon was already up, visible through the gauzy clouds, and his face glowed pale in the
white light. His mouth was hard, his eyes troubled.
"The point?" I prompted softly.
He ignored me, staring up at the moon.
"Twilight, again," he murmured. "Another ending. No matter how perfect the day is, it always has to end."
"Some things don't have to end," I muttered through my teeth, instantly tense.
He sighed.
"I brought you to the prom," he said slowly, finally answering my question, "because I don't want you to
miss anything. I don't want my presence to take anything away from you, if I can help it. I want you to
be human. I want your life to continue as it would have if I'd died in nineteen-eighteen like I should
have."
I shuddered at his words, and then shook my head angrily. "In what strange parallel dimension would I
ever have gone to prom of my own free will? If you weren't a thousand times stronger than me, I would
never have let you get away with this."
He smiled briefly, but it didn't touch his eyes. "It wasn't so bad, you said so yourself."
"That's because I was with you."
We were quiet for a minute; he stared at the moon and I stared at him. I wished there was some way to

