7. Lad-and-Girl Love
8. Strife in Love
9. Defeat of Miriam
10. Clara
11. The Test on Miriam
12. Passion
13. Baxter Dawes
14. The Release
15. Derelict

"I've told you about Mrs. Dawes," said Miriam huskily; she was nervous.
"Clara, do you know Paul?"

Paul remembered that Clara Dawes was the daughter of an old friend of
Mrs. Leivers. Miriam had sought her out because she had once been Spiral
overseer at Jordan's, and because her husband, Baxter Dawes, was smith
for the factory, making the irons for cripple instruments, and so on.
Through her Miriam felt she got into direct contact with Jordan's, and
could estimate better Paul's position. But Mrs. Dawes was separated from
her husband, and had taken up Women's Rights. She was supposed to be
clever. It interested Paul.

Clara Dawes had no children. When she had left her husband the home had
been broken up, and she had gone to live with her mother. Dawes lodged
with his sister. In the same house was a sister-in-law, and somehow Paul
knew that this girl, Louie Travers, was now Dawes's woman. She was a
handsome, insolent hussy, who mocked at the youth, and yet flushed if he
walked along to the station with her as she went home.

"Look at her mouth--made for passion--and the very setback of her
throat--" He threw his head back in Clara's defiant manner.

There was a silence for some moments, while he thought of Clara.

So in May she asked him to come to Willey Farm and meet Mrs. Dawes.
There was something he hankered after. She saw him, whenever they spoke
of Clara Dawes, rouse and get slightly angry. He said he did not like
her. Yet he was keen to know about her. Well, he should put himself to
the test. She believed that there were in him desires for higher things,
and desires for lower, and that the desire for the higher would conquer.
At any rate, he should try. She forgot that her "higher" and "lower"
were arbitrary.

He was rather excited at the idea of meeting Clara at Willey Farm. Mrs.
Dawes came for the day. Her heavy, dun-coloured hair was coiled on
top of her head. She wore a white blouse and navy skirt, and somehow,
wherever she was, seemed to make things look paltry and insignificant.
When she was in the room, the kitchen seemed too small and mean
altogether. Miriam's beautiful twilighty parlour looked stiff and
stupid. All the Leivers were eclipsed like candles. They found
her rather hard to put up with. Yet she was perfectly amiable, but
indifferent, and rather hard.

"Hasn't Clara come?" he asked.

Clara sat in the cool parlour reading. He saw the nape of her white
neck, and the fine hair lifted from it. She rose, looking at him
indifferently. To shake hands she lifted her arm straight, in a
manner that seemed at once to keep him at a distance, and yet to fling
something to him. He noticed how her breasts swelled inside her blouse,
and how her shoulder curved handsomely under the thin muslin at the top
of her arm.

"Well, you see," said Miriam, coughing huskily, "Clara only came with
father--and so--she's not been here very long."

Clara sat leaning on the table, holding aloof. He noticed her hands were
large, but well kept. And the skin on them seemed almost coarse, opaque,
and white, with fine golden hairs. She did not mind if he observed her
hands. She intended to scorn him. Her heavy arm lay negligently on the
table. Her mouth was closed as if she were offended, and she kept her
face slightly averted.

Miriam did not know this courteous Paul. Clara glanced at him.

Clara turned away again rather disdainfully.

"Margaret Bonford!" exclaimed Clara. "She's a great deal cleverer than
most men."

"And, of course, that is all that matters," said Clara witheringly.

"It's not heaven she wants to get--it's her fair share on earth,"
retorted Clara. She spoke as if he were responsible for some deprivation
which Miss Bonford suffered.

"'Darning her husband's stockings,'" said Clara scathingly.

But Clara refused to answer this sally of his. He talked to Miriam for a
little while. The other woman held aloof.

Edgar laughed. Together they unloaded the coal in the yard. Paul was
rather self-conscious, because he knew Clara could see if she looked out
of the window. She didn't look.

Edgar agreed. He had a good tenor voice, and he loved to learn all the
songs his friend could teach him, so that he could sing whilst he was
carting. Paul had a very indifferent baritone voice, but a good ear.
However, he sang softly, for fear of Clara. Edgar repeated the line in a
clear tenor. At times they both broke off to sneeze, and first one, then
the other, abused his horse.

"We have such jolly times," Miriam said to Clara.

After tea, when all the men had gone but Paul, Mrs. Leivers said to
Clara:

Miriam came for him a little later to know if he would go with Clara and
her for a walk. They set off down to Strelley Mill Farm. As they were
going beside the brook, on the Willey Water side, looking through the
brake at the edge of the wood, where pink campions glowed under a few
sunbeams, they saw, beyond the tree-trunks and the thin hazel bushes,
a man leading a great bay horse through the gullies. The big red beast
seemed to dance romantically through that dimness of green hazel drift,
away there where the air was shadowy, as if it were in the past, among
the fading bluebells that might have bloomed for Deidre or Iseult.

"And to have us shut up safely?" replied Clara.

"I have no doubt," said Clara, "that you would much rather fight for a
woman than let her fight for herself."

But Clara wearied of his flippancy. Suddenly, looking at her, he saw
that the upward lifting of her face was misery and not scorn. His heart
grew tender for everybody. He turned and was gentle with Miriam, whom he
had neglected till then.

It went up the bank in little leaps, then splashed finely through the
second brook. Clara, walking with a kind of sulky abandon, watched it
half-fascinated, half-contemptuous. Limb stopped and pointed to the
fence under some willows.

"He is glad to be back," said Clara, who was interested in the creature.

"Your horse IS a fine fellow!" said Clara.

"More loving than most men, I should think," replied Clara.

Clara, fascinated by the big beast, went up to stroke his neck.

"He's a beauty!" replied Clara.

Clara came up.

"I suppose," blurted Clara suddenly, "she wants a man."

Clara did not answer, but strode on uphill. She was walking with her
hand hanging, her legs swinging as she kicked through the dead thistles
and the tussocky grass, her arms hanging loose. Rather than walking, her
handsome body seemed to be blundering up the hill. A hot wave went over
Paul. He was curious about her. Perhaps life had been cruel to her. He
forgot Miriam, who was walking beside him talking to him. She glanced at
him, finding he did not answer her. His eyes were fixed ahead on Clara.

"Ah!" cried Miriam, and she looked at Paul, her dark eyes dilating. He
smiled. Together they enjoyed the field of flowers. Clara, a little way
off, was looking at the cowslips disconsolately. Paul and Miriam stayed
close together, talking in subdued tones. He kneeled on one knee,
quickly gathering the best blossoms, moving from tuft to tuft
restlessly, talking softly all the time. Miriam plucked the flowers
lovingly, lingering over them. He always seemed to her too quick and
almost scientific. Yet his bunches had a natural beauty more than hers.
He loved them, but as if they were his and he had a right to them. She
had more reverence for them: they held something she had not.

The flowers were very fresh and sweet. He wanted to drink them. As
he gathered them, he ate the little yellow trumpets. Clara was still
wandering about disconsolately. Going towards her, he said:

Clara now ignored him.

Whereupon he left her, and went stooping over the clumps of tangled
flowers which thickly sprinkled the field like pale, luminous
foam-clots. Miriam had come close. Clara was kneeling, breathing some
scent from the cowslips.

Clara's hat lay on the grass not far off. She was kneeling, bending
forward still to smell the flowers. Her neck gave him a sharp pang, such
a beautiful thing, yet not proud of itself just now. Her breasts swung
slightly in her blouse. The arching curve of her back was beautiful and
strong; she wore no stays. Suddenly, without knowing, he was scattering
a handful of cowslips over her hair and neck, saying:

Clara laughed strangely, and rose, picking the cowslips from her hair.
She took up her hat and pinned it on. One flower had remained tangled in
her hair. He saw, but would not tell her. He gathered up the flowers he
had sprinkled over her.

At the edge of the wood the bluebells had flowed over into the field and
stood there like flood-water. But they were fading now. Clara strayed up
to them. He wandered after her. The bluebells pleased him.

Miriam murmured assent. Clara was silent.

They were quiet. But it was as much as they could bear. They got jolly
again over tea. As they sat by Brayford, watching the boats, he told her
about Clara. His mother asked him innumerable questions.

Mrs. Morel considered. She would have been glad now for her son to fall
in love with some woman who would--she did not know what. But he fretted
so, got so furious suddenly, and again was melancholic. She wished he
knew some nice woman--She did not know what she wished, but left it
vague. At any rate, she was not hostile to the idea of Clara.

He grew more and more restless. Miriam did not satisfy him. His old mad
desire to be with her grew weaker. Sometimes he met Clara in Nottingham,
sometimes he went to meetings with her, sometimes he saw her at Willey
Farm. But on these last occasions the situation became strained. There
was a triangle of antagonism between Paul and Clara and Miriam. With
Clara he took on a smart, worldly, mocking tone very antagonistic to
Miriam. It did not matter what went before. She might be intimate and
sad with him. Then as soon as Clara appeared, it all vanished, and he
played to the newcomer.

And then, the next day, Clara came. They were to have tea in the
hayfield. Miriam watched the evening drawing to gold and shadow. And all
the time Paul was sporting with Clara. He made higher and higher heaps
of hay that they were jumping over. Miriam did not care for the game,
and stood aside. Edgar and Geoffrey and Maurice and Clara and Paul
jumped. Paul won, because he was light. Clara's blood was roused. She
could run like an Amazon. Paul loved the determined way she rushed at
the hay-cock and leaped, landed on the other side, her breasts shaken,
her thick hair come undone.

Paul could choose the lesser in place of the higher, she saw. He could
be unfaithful to himself, unfaithful to the real, deep Paul Morel.
There was a danger of his becoming frivolous, of his running after his
satisfaction like any Arthur, or like his father. It made Miriam bitter
to think that he should throw away his soul for this flippant traffic of
triviality with Clara. She walked in bitterness and silence, while the
other two rallied each other, and Paul sported.

This was the end of the first phase of Paul's love affair. He was now
about twenty-three years old, and, though still virgin, the sex instinct
that Miriam had over-refined for so long now grew particularly strong.
Often, as he talked to Clara Dawes, came that thickening and quickening
of his blood, that peculiar concentration in the breast, as if something
were alive there, a new self or a new centre of consciousness, warning
him that sooner or later he would have to ask one woman or another. But
he belonged to Miriam. Of that she was so fixedly sure that he allowed
her right.

Now she began to combat him in his restless fretting. He still kept up
his connection with Miriam, could neither break free nor go the whole
length of engagement. And this indecision seemed to bleed him of his
energy. Moreover, his mother suspected him of an unrecognised leaning
towards Clara, and, since the latter was a married woman, she wished he
would fall in love with one of the girls in a better station of life.
But he was stupid, and would refuse to love or even to admire a girl
much, just because she was his social superior.

The months went slowly along. Paul had more or less got into connection
with the Socialist, Suffragette, Unitarian people in Nottingham, owing
to his acquaintance with Clara. One day a friend of his and of Clara's,
in Bestwood, asked him to take a message to Mrs. Dawes. He went in the
evening across Sneinton Market to Bluebell Hill. He found the house in
a mean little street paved with granite cobbles and having causeways of
dark blue, grooved bricks. The front door went up a step from off this
rough pavement, where the feet of the passersby rasped and clattered.
The brown paint on the door was so old that the naked wood showed
between the rents. He stood on the street below and knocked. There came
a heavy footstep; a large, stout woman of about sixty towered above him.
He looked up at her from the pavement. She had a rather severe face.

She admitted him into the parlour, which opened on to the street. It was
a small, stuffy, defunct room, of mahogany, and deathly enlargements of
photographs of departed people done in carbon. Mrs. Radford left him.
She was stately, almost martial. In a moment Clara appeared. She flushed
deeply, and he was covered with confusion. It seemed as if she did not
like being discovered in her home circumstances.

Clara, much embarrassed, gave him a chair against the wall opposite the
white heaps. Then she herself took her place on the sofa, shamedly.

"Will you drink a bottle of stout?" Mrs. Radford asked. "Clara, get him
a bottle of stout."

Clara, ashamed and chagrined, brought him a bottle of stout and a glass.
He poured out some of the black stuff.

Clara began to work. Her jenny spun with a subdued buzz; the white
lace hopped from between her fingers on to the card. It was filled; she
snipped off the length, and pinned the end down to the banded lace. Then
she put a new card in her jenny. Paul watched her. She sat square and
magnificent. Her throat and arms were bare. The blood still mantled
below her ears; she bent her head in shame of her humility. Her face was
set on her work. Her arms were creamy and full of life beside the white
lace; her large, well-kept hands worked with a balanced movement, as if
nothing would hurry them. He, not knowing, watched her all the time. He
saw the arch of her neck from the shoulder, as she bent her head; he saw
the coil of dun hair; he watched her moving, gleaming arms.

"I've heard a bit about you from Clara," continued the mother. "You're
in Jordan's, aren't you?" She drew her lace unceasing.

Mrs. Radford looked across at him steadily. There was something
determined about her that he liked. Her face was falling loose, but her
eyes were calm, and there was something strong in her that made it
seem she was not old; merely her wrinkles and loose cheeks were an
anachronism. She had the strength and sang-froid of a woman in the prime
of life. She continued drawing the lace with slow, dignified movements.
The big web came up inevitably over her apron; the length of lace fell
away at her side. Her arms were finely shapen, but glossy and yellow
as old ivory. They had not the peculiar dull gleam that made Clara's so
fascinating to him.

Clara broke in, and he told her his message. She spoke humbly to him. He
had surprised her in her drudgery. To have her humble made him feel as
if he were lifting his head in expectation.

"Would you care to be back at Jordan's?" he asked Clara.

Clara suffered badly from her mother. Paul felt as if his eyes were
coming very wide open. Wasn't he to take Clara's fulminations so
seriously, after all? She spun steadily at her work. He experienced a
thrill of joy, thinking she might need his help. She seemed denied and
deprived of so much. And her arm moved mechanically, that should never
have been subdued to a mechanism, and her head was bowed to the lace,
that never should have been bowed. She seemed to be stranded there
among the refuse that life has thrown away, doing her jennying. It was
a bitter thing to her to be put aside by life, as if it had no use for
her. No wonder she protested.

He soon made occasion to call again on Clara.

Clara went on with her jennying. The white lace leaped in little jumps
and bounds on to the card. He waited for her. Without raising her head,
she said at last, in a peculiar low voice:

Clara came to Jordan's. Some of the older hands, Fanny among them,
remembered her earlier rule, and cordially disliked the memory. Clara
had always been "ikey", reserved, and superior. She had never mixed with
the girls as one of themselves. If she had occasion to find fault, she
did it coolly and with perfect politeness, which the defaulter felt to
be a bigger insult than crassness. Towards Fanny, the poor, overstrung
hunchback, Clara was unfailingly compassionate and gentle, as a result
of which Fanny shed more bitter tears than ever the rough tongues of the
other overseers had caused her.

There was something in Clara that Paul disliked, and much that piqued
him. If she were about, he always watched her strong throat or her neck,
upon which the blonde hair grew low and fluffy. There was a fine down,
almost invisible, upon the skin of her face and arms, and when once he
had perceived it, he saw it always.

During the ten years that she had belonged to the women's movement
she had acquired a fair amount of education, and, having had some of
Miriam's passion to be instructed, had taught herself French, and could
read in that language with a struggle. She considered herself as a woman
apart, and particularly apart, from her class. The girls in the Spiral
department were all of good homes. It was a small, special industry, and
had a certain distinction. There was an air of refinement in both rooms.
But Clara was aloof also from her fellow-workers.

Clara glanced round negligently. She was making an elastic stocking
of heliotrope silk, turning the Spiral machine with slow, balanced
regularity, occasionally bending down to see her work or to adjust the
needles; then her magnificent neck, with its down and fine pencils of
hair, shone white against the lavender, lustrous silk. She turned a few
more rounds, and stopped.

"What was I so impudent to Clara for?" He was rather annoyed with
himself, at the same time glad. "Serve her right; she stinks with silent
pride," he said to himself angrily.

And he went away to the other girls. He felt he was being angrier than
he had any need to be. In fact, he doubted slightly that he was showing
off. But if he were, then he would. Clara heard him laughing, in a way
she hated, with the girls down the next room.

When at evening he went through the department after the girls had gone,
he saw his chocolates lying untouched in front of Clara's machine. He
left them. In the morning they were still there, and Clara was at work.
Later on Minnie, a little brunette they called Pussy, called to him:

He went up to Clara's bench.

"Will you take some?" he said, offering them first to Clara. "These are
fresh."

He went past Clara without speaking. She felt the three chocolate creams
would burn her if she touched them. It needed all her courage to slip
them into the pocket of her apron.

"Yes, you want to know, don't you?" Fanny mocked, hugely delighted.
"There's one from everybody--except Lady Clara--and two from some. But I
shan't tell you how many I put."

"I'd rather be called sentimental than frozen meat," Fanny blurted. Paul
knew she referred to Clara, and he smiled.

The Queen of Sheba was Clara.

That day he met Clara as he ran downstairs to wash his hands at
dinner-time.

This move on the part of Clara brought them into closer intimacy. The
other girls noticed that when Paul met Mrs. Dawes his eyes lifted and
gave that peculiar bright greeting which they could interpret. Knowing
he was unaware, Clara made no sign, save that occasionally she turned
aside her face from him when he came upon her.

The afternoon was so gently warm and dim. Red roofs of the cottages
burned among the blue haze. He loved the day. He could feel, but he
could not understand, what Clara was saying.

He was like so many young men of his own age. Sex had become so
complicated in him that he would have denied that he ever could want
Clara or Miriam or any woman whom he knew. Sex desire was a sort of
detached thing, that did not belong to a woman. He loved Miriam with his
soul. He grew warm at the thought of Clara, he battled with her, he
knew the curves of her breast and shoulders as if they had been moulded
inside him; and yet he did not positively desire her. He would have
denied it for ever. He believed himself really bound to Miriam. If ever
he should marry, some time in the far future, it would be his duty to
marry Miriam. That he gave Clara to understand, and she said nothing,
but left him to his courses. He came to her, Mrs. Dawes, whenever
he could. Then he wrote frequently to Miriam, and visited the girl
occasionally. So he went on through the winter; but he seemed not so
fretted. His mother was easier about him. She thought he was getting
away from Miriam.

Miriam knew now how strong was the attraction of Clara for him; but
still she was certain that the best in him would triumph. His feeling
for Mrs. Dawes--who, moreover, was a married woman--was shallow and
temporal, compared with his love for herself. He would come back to her,
she was sure; with some of his young freshness gone, perhaps, but cured
of his desire for the lesser things which other women than herself could
give him. She could bear all if he were inwardly true to her and must
come back.

He saw none of the anomaly of his position. Miriam was his old friend,
lover, and she belonged to Bestwood and home and his youth. Clara was a
newer friend, and she belonged to Nottingham, to life, to the world. It
seemed to him quite plain.

"Will you come in to the concert on Sunday afternoon?" Clara asked him
just after Christmas.

"It's a long time," Clara replied.

"How?" asked Clara.

"Why not?" Clara asked.

WITH the spring came again the old madness and battle. Now he knew he
would have to go to Miriam. But what was his reluctance? He told himself
it was only a sort of overstrong virginity in her and him which neither
could break through. He might have married her; but his circumstances
at home made it difficult, and, moreover, he did not want to marry.
Marriage was for life, and because they had become close companions, he
and she, he did not see that it should inevitably follow they should be
man and wife. He did not feel that he wanted marriage with Miriam. He
wished he did. He would have given his head to have felt a joyous desire
to marry her and to have her. Then why couldn't he bring it off? There
was some obstacle; and what was the obstacle? It lay in the physical
bondage. He shrank from the physical contact. But why? With her he felt
bound up inside himself. He could not go out to her. Something struggled
in him, but he could not get to her. Why? She loved him. Clara said she
even wanted him; then why couldn't he go to her, make love to her, kiss
her? Why, when she put her arm in his, timidly, as they walked, did he
feel he would burst forth in brutality and recoil? He owed himself to
her; he wanted to belong to her. Perhaps the recoil and the shrinking
from her was love in its first fierce modesty. He had no aversion for
her. No, it was the opposite; it was a strong desire battling with a
still stronger shyness and virginity. It seemed as if virginity were a
positive force, which fought and won in both of them. And with her he
felt it so hard to overcome; yet he was nearest to her, and with her
alone could he deliberately break through. And he owed himself to her.
Then, if they could get things right, they could marry; but he would not
marry unless he could feel strong in the joy of it--never. He could not
have faced his mother. It seemed to him that to sacrifice himself in
a marriage he did not want would be degrading, and would undo all his
life, make it a nullity. He would try what he COULD do.

For some months he had seen very little of Clara. They had occasionally
walked out for half an hour at dinner-time. But he always reserved
himself for Miriam. With Clara, however, his brow cleared, and he
was gay again. She treated him indulgently, as if he were a child. He
thought he did not mind. But deep below the surface it piqued him.

"What about Clara? I hear nothing of her lately."

But insidiously, without his knowing it, the warmth he felt for Clara
drew him away from Miriam, for whom he felt responsible, and to whom he
felt he belonged. He thought he was being quite faithful to her. It was
not easy to estimate exactly the strength and warmth of one's feelings
for a woman till they have run away with one.

During the summer Clara wore sometimes a dress of soft cotton stuff with
loose sleeves. When she lifted her hands, her sleeves fell back, and her
beautiful strong arms shone out.

"I think Clara has such beautiful arms," he said.

Frequently he hated Miriam. He hated her as she bent forward and pored
over his things. He hated her way of patiently casting him up, as if he
were an endless psychological account. When he was with her, he hated
her for having got him, and yet not got him, and he tortured her. She
took all and gave nothing, he said. At least, she gave no living warmth.
She was never alive, and giving off life. Looking for her was like
looking for something which did not exist. She was only his conscience,
not his mate. He hated her violently, and was more cruel to her. They
dragged on till the next summer. He saw more and more of Clara.

She, however, knew in her heart that Clara's influence was over him to
liberate him. But she said nothing.

"And have you said anything to Clara?" she asked.

After leaving Miriam he went almost straight to Clara. On the Monday
following the day of the rupture he went down to the work-room. She
looked up at him and smiled. They had grown very intimate unawares. She
saw a new brightness about him.

Clara did not answer, and he returned to his work. She was so quiet and
so superb!

There was the faintest haze over the silvery-dark water and the green
meadow-bank, and the elm-trees that were spangled with gold. The river
slid by in a body, utterly silent and swift, intertwining among itself
like some subtle, complex creature. Clara walked moodily beside him.

"And what did she say?" Clara asked.

Clara pondered over this for a time.

"How old ARE you?" Clara asked.

The river slid and twined its great volume. On the other bank cattle
were feeding on the desolate flats. The cliff rose high above Paul and
Clara on their right hand. They stood against the tree in the watery
silence.

Suddenly, coming on to the little level, he saw two figures of men
standing silent at the water's edge. His heart leaped. They were
fishing. He turned and put his hand up warningly to Clara. She
hesitated, buttoned her coat. The two went on together.

The fishermen turned curiously to watch the two intruders on their
privacy and solitude. They had had a fire, but it was nearly out. All
kept perfectly still. The men turned again to their fishing, stood
over the grey glinting river like statues. Clara went with bowed head,
flushing; he was laughing to himself. Directly they passed out of sight
behind the willows.

Clara did not answer. They toiled forward along a tiny path on the
river's lip. Suddenly it vanished. The bank was sheer red solid clay
in front of them, sloping straight into the river. He stood and cursed
beneath his breath, setting his teeth.

"It's impossible!" said Clara.

"I don't know whether you'd like some radishes as well," she said to
Clara; "but I've got some in the garden--AND a cucumber."

Clara flushed. She looked very handsome.

"If she knew!" said Clara quietly to him.

They went on with the meal. When they were going away, the old lady came
timidly with three tiny dahlias in full blow, neat as bees, and speckled
scarlet and white. She stood before Clara, pleased with herself, saying:

"Oh, how pretty!" cried Clara, accepting the flowers.

Clara was rather quiet and uncomfortable. As they walked along, he said:

"Yes; I've been down Clifton Grove with Clara."

"Yes; I went up Clifton Grove on Monday afternoon with Clara."

"And how IS Clara?" asked Miriam.

Another day, when he saw Miriam, the conversation turned to marriage,
then to Clara's marriage with Dawes.

"And you think Clara never had it?"

Miriam pondered this. She saw what he was seeking--a sort of baptism of
fire in passion, it seemed to her. She realised that he would never be
satisfied till he had it. Perhaps it was essential to him, as to some
men, to sow wild oats; and afterwards, when he was satisfied, he would
not rage with restlessness any more, but could settle down and give her
his life into her hands. Well, then, if he must go, let him go and have
his fill--something big and intense, he called it. At any rate, when he
had got it, he would not want it--that he said himself; he would want
the other thing that she could give him. He would want to be owned, so
that he could work. It seemed to her a bitter thing that he must go, but
she could let him go into an inn for a glass of whisky, so she could let
him go to Clara, so long as it was something that would satisfy a need
in him, and leave him free for herself to possess.

"Have you told your mother about Clara?" she asked.

She knew this would be a test of the seriousness of his feeling for the
other woman: she knew he was going to Clara for something vital, not as
a man goes for pleasure to a prostitute, if he told his mother.

There was a silence. Things had gone quicker than she thought. She felt
a sudden bitterness that he could leave her so soon and so entirely.
And was Clara to be accepted by his people, who had been so hostile to
herself?

"I may call in as I go to chapel," she said. "It is a long time since I
saw Clara."

On the Sunday afternoon he went to Keston to meet Clara at the station.
As he stood on the platform he was trying to examine in himself if he
had a premonition.

"What a pity there is a coal-pit here where it is so pretty!" said
Clara.

Mrs. Morel sat in her rocking-chair, wearing her black silk blouse.
Her grey-brown hair was taken smooth back from her brow and her high
temples; her face was rather pale. Clara, suffering, followed Paul into
the kitchen. Mrs. Morel rose. Clara thought her a lady, even rather
stiff. The young woman was very nervous. She had almost a wistful look,
almost resigned.

"Mother--Clara," said Paul.

The blood flamed in Clara's cheek.

Paul, watching, felt his heart contract with pain. His mother looked so
small, and sallow, and done-for beside the luxuriant Clara.

His mother looked at him; he had turned to her. She thought what a
man he seemed, in his dark, well-made clothes. He was pale and
detached-looking; it would be hard for any woman to keep him. Her heart
glowed; then she was sorry for Clara.

She loved his artist's paraphernalia, and the books, and the photos of
people. Soon he was telling her: this was William, this was William's
young lady in the evening dress, this was Annie and her husband, this
was Arthur and his wife and the baby. She felt as if she were being
taken into the family. He showed her photos, books, sketches, and they
talked a little while. Then they returned to the kitchen. Mrs. Morel put
aside her book. Clara wore a blouse of fine silk chiffon, with narrow
black-and-white stripes; her hair was done simply, coiled on top of her
head. She looked rather stately and reserved.

"Oh, did you!" said Clara. "I have a friend in number 6."

And the conversation had started. They talked Nottingham and Nottingham
people; it interested them both. Clara was still rather nervous; Mrs.
Morel was still somewhat on her dignity. She clipped her language very
clear and precise. But they were going to get on well together, Paul
saw.

Mrs. Morel measured herself against the younger woman, and found herself
easily stronger. Clara was deferential. She knew Paul's surprising
regard for his mother, and she had dreaded the meeting, expecting
someone rather hard and cold. She was surprised to find this little
interested woman chatting with such readiness; and then she felt, as she
felt with Paul, that she would not care to stand in Mrs. Morel's way.
There was something so hard and certain in his mother, as if she never
had a misgiving in her life.

Then Morel pulled himself together. Clara saw Paul's manner of bowing
and shaking hands.

Clara was astonished at this flood of hospitality from the old collier.
He was so courteous, so gallant! She thought him most delightful.

At tea Clara felt the refinement and sang-froid of the household. Mrs.
Morel was perfectly at her ease. The pouring out the tea and attending
to the people went on unconsciously, without interrupting her in her
talk. There was a lot of room at the oval table; the china of dark blue
willow-pattern looked pretty on the glossy cloth. There was a little
bowl of small, yellow chrysanthemums. Clara felt she completed the
circle, and it was a pleasure to her. But she was rather afraid of the
self-possession of the Morels, father and all. She took their tone;
there was a feeling of balance. It was a cool, clear atmosphere, where
everyone was himself, and in harmony. Clara enjoyed it, but there was a
fear deep at the bottom of her.

Paul cleared the table whilst his mother and Clara talked. Clara was
conscious of his quick, vigorous body as it came and went, seeming blown
quickly by a wind at its work. It was almost like the hither and thither
of a leaf that comes unexpected. Most of herself went with him. By the
way she leaned forward, as if listening, Mrs. Morel could see she was
possessed elsewhere as she talked, and again the elder woman was sorry
for her.

Having finished, he strolled down the garden, leaving the two women
to talk. It was a hazy, sunny afternoon, mild and soft. Clara glanced
through the window after him as he loitered among the chrysanthemums.
She felt as if something almost tangible fastened her to him; yet he
seemed so easy in his graceful, indolent movement, so detached as he
tied up the too-heavy flower branches to their stakes, that she wanted
to shriek in her helplessness.

"You will let me help you wash up," said Clara.

Clara, however, dried the tea-things, and was glad to be on such good
terms with his mother; but it was torture not to be able to follow him
down the garden. At last she allowed herself to go; she felt as if a
rope were taken off her ankle.

Clara stood near him. Over the low red wall in front was the country and
the far-off hills, all golden dim.

At that moment Miriam was entering through the garden-door. She saw
Clara go up to him, saw him turn, and saw them come to rest together.
Something in their perfect isolation together made her know that it was
accomplished between them, that they were, as she put it, married. She
walked very slowly down the cinder-track of the long garden.

Clara had pulled a button from a hollyhock spire, and was breaking it
to get the seeds. Above her bowed head the pink flowers stared, as if
defending her. The last bees were falling down to the hive.

She shook hands with Clara, saying:

"I like it very much," replied Clara.

Then Miriam realised that Clara was accepted as she had never been.

"Yes; I went to Agatha's to tea. We are going to chapel. I only called
in for a moment to see Clara."

Miriam laughed shortly, and Clara turned impatiently aside.

"I don't think you've seen all the sorts. Come and look. Come and see
which are YOUR favourites, Clara."

"Yes; she said she'd call and see Clara."

"You've not seen Mrs. Morel before?" Miriam was saying to Clara.

Clara turned to go indoors, whilst he accompanied Miriam to the gate.

"I couldn't say," replied Clara.

They parted. He felt guilty towards her. She was bitter, and she scorned
him. He still belonged to herself, she believed; yet he could have
Clara, take her home, sit with her next his mother in chapel, give her
the same hymn-book he had given herself years before. She heard him
running quickly indoors.

But he did not go straight in. Halting on the plot of grass, he heard
his mother's voice, then Clara's answer:

His heart went hot, and he was angry with them for talking about the
girl. What right had they to say that? Something in the speech itself
stung him into a flame of hate against Miriam. Then his own heart
rebelled furiously at Clara's taking the liberty of speaking so about
Miriam. After all, the girl was the better woman of the two, he thought,
if it came to goodness. He went indoors. His mother looked excited. She
was beating with her hand rhythmically on the sofa-arm, as women do who
are wearing out. He could never bear to see the movement. There was a
silence; then he began to talk.

In chapel Miriam saw him find the place in the hymn-book for Clara, in
exactly the same way as he used for herself. And during the sermon he
could see the girl across the chapel, her hat throwing a dark shadow
over her face. What did she think, seeing Clara with him? He did not
stop to consider. He felt himself cruel towards Miriam.

After chapel he went over Pentrich with Clara. It was a dark autumn
night. They had said good-bye to Miriam, and his heart had smitten him
as he left the girl alone. "But it serves her right," he said inside
himself, and it almost gave him pleasure to go off under her eyes with
this other handsome woman.

There was a scent of damp leaves in the darkness. Clara's hand lay warm
and inert in his own as they walked. He was full of conflict. The battle
that raged inside him made him feel desperate.

Up Pentrich Hill Clara leaned against him as he went. He slid his arm
round her waist. Feeling the strong motion of her body under his arm as
she walked, the tightness in his chest because of Miriam relaxed, and
the hot blood bathed him. He held her closer and closer.

"Your mother doesn't care for her," said Clara.

"But you can't really give her up," said Clara.

Clara drew away from him, leaning away from contact with him.

"You'd better run after Miriam," mocked Clara.

"If you hurry," he said brusquely. "But you could easily walk it, Clara;
it's only seven miles to the tram. I'll come with you."

Clara ran, quite out of breath, and fell at last into the train. The
whistle blew. He was gone. Gone!--and she was in a carriage full of
people. She felt the cruelty of it.

The next day there was a new aloofness about him. Clara was very gentle,
almost loving. But he treated her distantly, with a touch of contempt.
She sighed, continuing to be gentle. He came round.

One evening of that week Sarah Bernhardt was at the Theatre Royal in
Nottingham, giving "La Dame aux Camelias". Paul wanted to see this old
and famous actress, and he asked Clara to accompany him. He told his
mother to leave the key in the window for him.

"Shall I book seats?" he asked of Clara.

"But, good Lord, Clara! Think of ME in evening suit at the theatre!" he
remonstrated.

"Clara asked me," he said.

He dressed at Jordan's, put on an overcoat and a cap, and met Clara in a
cafe. She was with one of her suffragette friends. She wore an old long
coat, which did not suit her, and had a little wrap over her head, which
he hated. The three went to the theatre together.

Clara took off her coat on the stairs, and he discovered she was in a
sort of semi-evening dress, that left her arms and neck and part of her
breast bare. Her hair was done fashionably. The dress, a simple thing
of green crape, suited her. She looked quite grand, he thought. He could
see her figure inside the frock, as if that were wrapped closely round
her. The firmness and the softness of her upright body could almost be
felt as he looked at her. He clenched his fists.

The drama continued. He saw it all in the distance, going on somewhere;
he did not know where, but it seemed far away inside him. He was Clara's
white heavy arms, her throat, her moving bosom. That seemed to be
himself. Then away somewhere the play went on, and he was identified
with that also. There was no himself. The grey and black eyes of Clara,
her bosom coming down on him, her arm that he held gripped between his
hands, were all that existed. Then he felt himself small and helpless,
her towering in her force above him.

Only the intervals, when the lights came up, hurt him expressibly. He
wanted to run anywhere, so long as it would be dark again. In a maze,
he wandered out for a drink. Then the lights were out, and the strange,
insane reality of Clara and the drama took hold of him again.

The play went on. But he was obsessed by the desire to kiss the tiny
blue vein that nestled in the bend of her arm. He could feel it. His
whole face seemed suspended till he had put his lips there. It must be
done. And the other people! At last he bent quickly forward and touched
it with his lips. His moustache brushed the sensitive flesh. Clara
shivered, drew away her arm.

Clara looked at him.

She remained quiet. Together they went out of the theatre. He saw the
cabs waiting, the people passing. It seemed he met a pair of brown
eyes which hated him. But he did not know. He and Clara turned away,
mechanically taking the direction to the station.

They hurried along the silent, dark little street, the only people out
of doors. Clara quickly entered the house. He hesitated.

The big, straight-standing woman was trying to estimate the situation.
She moved about the cupboard. Clara took his coat. The room was very
warm and cosy in the lamplight.

He in his dinner jacket, and Clara in her green dress and bare arms,
were confused. They felt they must shelter each other in that little
kitchen.

"And look at THAT blossom!" continued Mrs. Radford, pointing to Clara.
"What does she reckon she did it for?"

Paul looked at Clara. She was rosy; her neck was warm with blushes.
There was a moment of silence.

"I've seen people look bigger fools," he said. Clara was under his
protection now.

"And do you call THAT looking nice!" cried the mother, pointing a
scornful fork at Clara. "That--that looks as if it wasn't properly
dressed!"

Clara sat with bowed head. His eyes were dark and glittering. Mrs.
Radford took the Dutch oven from the fire, and stood near him, putting
bits of bacon on his plate.

"But DO have some!" he said to Clara.

The blood was beating up like fire in his veins. Mrs. Radford sat down
again, large and impressive and aloof. He left Clara altogether to
attend to the mother.

"That's the worst of my mother," said Clara. "She never wants a stool
for anything."

Soon the supper was finished. Mrs. Radford sat guard in her chair. Paul
lit a cigarette. Clara went upstairs, returning with a sleeping-suit,
which she spread on the fender to air.

"Are YOU tired?" he asked of Clara.

Clara brought the cards, and sat spinning her wedding-ring whilst he
shuffled them. Mrs. Radford was washing up in the scullery. As it grew
later Paul felt the situation getting more and more tense.

The clock struck one. Still the game continued. Mrs. Radford had done
all the little jobs preparatory to going to bed, had locked the door
and filled the kettle. Still Paul went on dealing and counting. He was
obsessed by Clara's arms and throat. He believed he could see where the
division was just beginning for her breasts. He could not leave her. She
watched his hands, and felt her joints melt as they moved quickly. She
was so near; it was almost as if he touched her, and yet not quite. His
mettle was roused. He hated Mrs. Radford. She sat on, nearly dropping
asleep, but determined and obstinate in her chair. Paul glanced at her,
then at Clara. She met his eyes, that were angry, mocking, and hard as
steel. Her own answered him in shame. He knew SHE, at any rate, was of
his mind. He played on.

Clara saw his mouth shut hard. Again he glanced at her. It seemed like
an agreement. She bent over the cards, coughing, to clear her throat.

He bade good-night to Clara, and went. The twisting stairs of white,
scrubbed wood creaked and clanged at every step. He went doggedly. The
two doors faced each other. He went in his room, pushed the door to,
without fastening the latch.

It was a small room with a large bed. Some of Clara's hair-pins were
on the dressing-table--her hair-brush. Her clothes and some skirts hung
under a cloth in a corner. There was actually a pair of stockings over
a chair. He explored the room. Two books of his own were there on the
shelf. He undressed, folded his suit, and sat on the bed, listening.
Then he blew out the candle, lay down, and in two minutes was almost
asleep. Then click!--he was wide awake and writhing in torment. It
was as if, when he had nearly got to sleep, something had bitten him
suddenly and sent him mad. He sat up and looked at the room in the
darkness, his feet doubled under him, perfectly motionless, listening.
He heard a cat somewhere away outside; then the heavy, poised tread of
the mother; then Clara's distinct voice:

"I shan't be long," said Clara.

Immediately afterwards Paul heard the mother slowly mounting the stairs.
The candlelight flashed through the cracks in his door. Her dress
brushed the door, and his heart jumped. Then it was dark, and he
heard the clatter of her latch. She was very leisurely indeed in her
preparations for sleep. After a long time it was quite still. He sat
strung up on the bed, shivering slightly. His door was an inch open.
As Clara came upstairs, he would intercept her. He waited. All was dead
silence. The clock struck two. Then he heard a slight scrape of the
fender downstairs. Now he could not help himself. His shivering was
uncontrollable. He felt he must go or die.

Then he stood, arrested. Clara was kneeling on a pile of white
underclothing on the hearthrug, her back towards him, warming herself.
She did not look round, but sat crouching on her heels, and her rounded
beautiful back was towards him, and her face was hidden. She was warming
her body at the fire for consolation. The glow was rosy on one side, the
shadow was dark and warm on the other. Her arms hung slack.

"You'd only Clara," he said. "And Mr. Radford's in heaven. So I suppose
there's only you left to be the bad un."

Clara was very quiet at breakfast, but she had a sort of air of
proprietorship over him that pleased him infinitely. Mrs. Radford was
evidently fond of him. He began to talk of his painting.

"You and Clara and me."

SOON after Paul had been to the theatre with Clara, he was drinking
in the Punch Bowl with some friends of his when Dawes came in. Clara's
husband was growing stout; his eyelids were getting slack over his brown
eyes; he was losing his healthy firmness of flesh. He was very evidently
on the downward track. Having quarrelled with his sister, he had gone
into cheap lodgings. His mistress had left him for a man who would marry
her. He had been in prison one night for fighting when he was drunk, and
there was a shady betting episode in which he was concerned.

Paul looked at him; their eyes met. Then he knew Dawes had seen him
coming out of the theatre with Clara.

Clara was happy, almost sure of him. She felt she had at last got him
for herself; and then again came the uncertainty. He told her jestingly
of the affair with her husband. Her colour came up, her grey eyes
flashed.

Clara looked at her lover closely. There was something in him she hated,
a sort of detached criticism of herself, a coldness which made her
woman's soul harden against him.

Clara was silent for a moment.

Dawes knew from his tone that he had been speaking to Clara. He stepped
forward.

The smith looked down contemptuously on his employer. His hands, large,
and grimy, and yet well shaped for his labour, worked restlessly. Paul
remembered they were the hands of Clara's husband, and a flash of hate
went through him.

"Well," said Paul, "I'm sorry if I said the wrong thing." Clara was also
very angry.

"But you wouldn't want to marry Clara?" she said.

"But no, mother. I even love Clara, and I did Miriam; but to GIVE myself
to them in marriage I couldn't. I couldn't belong to them. They seem to
want ME, and I can't ever give it them."

Clara was, indeed, passionately in love with him, and he with her, as
far as passion went. In the daytime he forgot her a good deal. She was
working in the same building, but he was not aware of it. He was busy,
and her existence was of no matter to him. But all the time she was in
her Spiral room she had a sense that he was upstairs, a physical sense
of his person in the same building. Every second she expected him to
come through the door, and when he came it was a shock to her. But he
was often short and offhand with her. He gave her his directions in an
official manner, keeping her at bay. With what wits she had left she
listened to him. She dared not misunderstand or fail to remember, but
it was a cruelty to her. She wanted to touch his chest. She knew exactly
how his breast was shapen under the waistcoat, and she wanted to touch
it. It maddened her to hear his mechanical voice giving orders about
the work. She wanted to break through the sham of it, smash the trivial
coating of business which covered him with hardness, get at the man
again; but she was afraid, and before she could feel one touch of his
warmth he was gone, and she ached again.

"Clara," he said, struggling.

And soon the struggle went down in his soul, and he forgot. But then
Clara was not there for him, only a woman, warm, something he loved
and almost worshipped, there in the dark. But it was not Clara, and she
submitted to him. The naked hunger and inevitability of his loving her,
something strong and blind and ruthless in its primitiveness, made the
hour almost terrible to her. She knew how stark and alone he was, and
she felt it was great that he came to her; and she took him simply
because his need was bigger either than her or him, and her soul was
still within her. She did this for him in his need, even if he left her,
for she loved him.

All the while the peewits were screaming in the field. When he came to,
he wondered what was near his eyes, curving and strong with life in the
dark, and what voice it was speaking. Then he realised it was the grass,
and the peewit was calling. The warmth was Clara's breathing heaving.
He lifted his head, and looked into her eyes. They were dark and shining
and strange, life wild at the source staring into his life, stranger to
him, yet meeting him; and he put his face down on her throat, afraid.
What was she? A strong, strange, wild life, that breathed with his
in the darkness through this hour. It was all so much bigger than
themselves that he was hushed. They had met, and included in their
meeting the thrust of the manifold grass stems, the cry of the peewit,
the wheel of the stars.

But Clara was not satisfied. Something great was there, she knew;
something great enveloped her. But it did not keep her. In the morning
it was not the same. They had KNOWN, but she could not keep the moment.
She wanted it again; she wanted something permanent. She had not
realised fully. She thought it was he whom she wanted. He was not safe
to her. This that had been between them might never be again; he might
leave her. She had not got him; she was not satisfied. She had been
there, but she had not gripped the--the something--she knew not
what--which she was mad to have.

In the morning he had considerable peace, and was happy in himself. It
seemed almost as if he had known the baptism of fire in passion, and it
left him at rest. But it was not Clara. It was something that happened
because of her, but it was not her. They were scarcely any nearer each
other. It was as if they had been blind agents of a great force.

After that the fire slowly went down. He felt more and more that his
experience had been impersonal, and not Clara. He loved her. There was
a big tenderness, as after a strong emotion they had known together; but
it was not she who could keep his soul steady. He had wanted her to be
something she could not be.

It was known in Nottingham that Paul Morel and Mrs. Dawes were going
together, but as nothing was very obvious, and Clara always a solitary
person, and he seemed so simple and innocent, it did not make much
difference.

The morning was of a lovely limpid gold colour. Veils of shadow seemed
to be drifting away on the north and the south. Clara stood shrinking
slightly from the touch of the wind, twisting her hair. The sea-grass
rose behind the white stripped woman. She glanced at the sea, then
looked at him. He was watching her with dark eyes which she loved and
could not understand. She hugged her breasts between her arms, cringing,
laughing:

He half-expected Clara to answer him, as his mother would: "You consider
your own affairs, and don't know so much about other people's." But she
took him seriously, almost to his own surprise.

"If you were as wonderful as you say--," replied Clara.

Clara had gone to live with her mother upon Mapperley Plains. One
evening, as Paul and she were walking along Woodborough Road, they met
Dawes. Morel knew something about the bearing of the man approaching,
but he was absorbed in his thinking at the moment, so that only his
artist's eye watched the form of the stranger. Then he suddenly turned
to Clara with a laugh, and put his hand on her shoulder, saying,
laughing:

"Who was that?" he asked of Clara.

Paul took his hand from her shoulder and glanced round; then he saw
again distinctly the man's form as it approached him. Dawes still walked
erect, with his fine shoulders flung back, and his face lifted; but
there was a furtive look in his eyes that gave one the impression he was
trying to get unnoticed past every person he met, glancing suspiciously
to see what they thought of him. And his hands seemed to be wanting to
hide. He wore old clothes, the trousers were torn at the knee, and the
handkerchief tied round his throat was dirty; but his cap was still
defiantly over one eye. As she saw him, Clara felt guilty. There was
a tiredness and despair on his face that made her hate him, because it
hurt her.

He again felt guilty. Did he leave Clara out of count, and take simply
women? But he thought that was splitting a hair.

It was true as he said. As a rule, when he started love-making, the
emotion was strong enough to carry with it everything--reason, soul,
blood--in a great sweep, like the Trent carries bodily its back-swirls
and intertwinings, noiselessly. Gradually the little criticisms, the
little sensations, were lost, thought also went, everything borne along
in one flood. He became, not a man with a mind, but a great instinct.
His hands were like creatures, living; his limbs, his body, were
all life and consciousness, subject to no will of his, but living in
themselves. Just as he was, so it seemed the vigorous, wintry stars were
strong also with life. He and they struck with the same pulse of fire,
and the same joy of strength which held the bracken-frond stiff near
his eyes held his own body firm. It was as if he, and the stars, and the
dark herbage, and Clara were licked up in an immense tongue of flame,
which tore onwards and upwards. Everything rushed along in living beside
him; everything was still, perfect in itself, along with him. This
wonderful stillness in each thing in itself, while it was being borne
along in a very ecstasy of living, seemed the highest point of bliss.

And Clara knew this held him to her, so she trusted altogether to the
passion. It, however, failed her very often. They did not often reach
again the height of that once when the peewits had called. Gradually,
some mechanical effort spoilt their loving, or, when they had splendid
moments, they had them separately, and not so satisfactorily. So often
he seemed merely to be running on alone; often they realised it had been
a failure, not what they had wanted. He left her, knowing THAT evening
had only made a little split between them. Their loving grew more
mechanical, without the marvellous glamour. Gradually they began to
introduce novelties, to get back some of the feeling of satisfaction.
They would be very near, almost dangerously near to the river, so that
the black water ran not far from his face, and it gave a little thrill;
or they loved sometimes in a little hollow below the fence of the path
where people were passing occasionally, on the edge of the town, and
they heard footsteps coming, almost felt the vibration of the tread,
and they heard what the passersby said--strange little things that
were never intended to be heard. And afterwards each of them was rather
ashamed, and these things caused a distance between the two of them. He
began to despise her a little, as if she had merited it!

He had a dislocated shoulder, and the second day acute bronchitis set
in. His mother was pale as death now, and very thin. She would sit and
look at him, then away into space. There was something between them that
neither dared mention. Clara came to see him. Afterwards he said to his
mother:

It was given out everywhere that it was a bicycle accident. Soon he
was able to go to work again, but now there was a constant sickness and
gnawing at his heart. He went to Clara, but there seemed, as it were,
nobody there. He could not work. He and his mother seemed almost to
avoid each other. There was some secret between them which they could
not bear. He was not aware of it. He only knew that his life seemed
unbalanced, as if it were going to smash into pieces.

Clara did not know what was the matter with him. She realised that he
seemed unaware of her. Even when he came to her he seemed unaware of
her; always he was somewhere else. She felt she was clutching for him,
and he was somewhere else. It tortured her, and so she tortured him. For
a month at a time she kept him at arm's length. He almost hated her, and
was driven to her in spite of himself. He went mostly into the company
of men, was always at the George or the White Horse. His mother was ill,
distant, quiet, shadowy. He was terrified of something; he dared not
look at her. Her eyes seemed to grow darker, her face more waxen; still
she dragged about at her work.

The two young men set off gaily for Blackpool. Mrs. Morel was quite
lively as Paul kissed her and left her. Once at the station, he forgot
everything. Four days were clear--not an anxiety, not a thought. The two
young men simply enjoyed themselves. Paul was like another man. None of
himself remained--no Clara, no Miriam, no mother that fretted him. He
wrote to them all, and long letters to his mother; but they were jolly
letters that made her laugh. He was having a good time, as young fellows
will in a place like Blackpool. And underneath it all was a shadow for
her.

In the afternoon he went a walk with Clara. They sat in the little wood
where bluebells were standing. He took her hand.

"You'll see," he said to Clara, "she'll never be better."

Her breast was there, warm for him; her hands were in his hair. It was
comforting, and he held his arms round her. But he did not forget. He
only talked to Clara of something else. And it was always so. When she
felt it coming, the agony, she cried to him:

And she pressed him to her breast, rocked him, soothed him like a
child. So he put the trouble aside for her sake, to take it up again
immediately he was alone. All the time, as he went about, he cried
mechanically. His mind and hands were busy. He cried, he did not know
why. It was his blood weeping. He was just as much alone whether he was
with Clara or with the men in the White Horse. Just himself and this
pressure inside him, that was all that existed. He read sometimes. He
had to keep his mind occupied. And Clara was a way of occupying his
mind.

He did not tell his mother, but next day he spoke to Clara about this
interview. It was in the dinner-hour. The two did not often go out
together now, but this day he asked her to go with him to the Castle
grounds. There they sat while the scarlet geraniums and the yellow
calceolarias blazed in the sunlight. She was now always rather
protective, and rather resentful towards him.

Clara seemed stricken by the news.

He only wanted to be left alone now. He had his own trouble, which was
almost too much to bear. Clara only tormented him and made him tired. He
was not sorry when he left her.

In the morning they were both normal again, though her face was grey
with the morphia, and her body felt like ash. But they were bright
again, nevertheless. Often, especially if Annie or Arthur were at home,
he neglected her. He did not see much of Clara. Usually he was with
men. He was quick and active and lively; but when his friends saw him
go white to the gills, his eyes dark and glittering, they had a certain
mistrust of him. Sometimes he went to Clara, but she was almost cold to
him.

Dawes had come to Colonel Seely's Home near Nottingham. There Paul
visited him sometimes, Clara very occasionally. Between the two men
the friendship developed peculiarly. Dawes, who mended very slowly and
seemed very feeble, seemed to leave himself in the hands of Morel.

In the beginning of November Clara reminded Paul that it was her
birthday.

Clara's heart sank.

"Yes," said Clara.

"Oh, how horrible!" said Clara, too frightened to speak.

"Don't think of it!" cried Clara.

His voice ceased. He did not cry, only went on speaking monotonously.
Clara wanted to run. She looked round. There was the black, re-echoing
shore, the dark sky down on her. She got up terrified. She wanted to be
where there was light, where there were other people. She wanted to be
away from him. He sat with his head dropped, not moving a muscle.

"Come!" said Clara roughly. "I'm going."

"I went with Clara," said Paul.

This was the first time Clara had been definitely mentioned between
them.

Still the days and the weeks went by. He hardly ever went to see Clara
now. But he wandered restlessly from one person to another for some
help, and there was none anywhere. Miriam had written to him tenderly.
He went to see her. Her heart was very sore when she saw him, white,
gaunt, with his eyes dark and bewildered. Her pity came up, hurting her
till she could not bear it.

Paul went about from place to place, doing the business of the death. He
met Clara in Nottingham, and they had tea together in a cafe, when they
were quite jolly again. She was infinitely relieved to find he did not
take it tragically.

The weeks passed half-real, not much pain, not much of anything, perhaps
a little relief, mostly a _nuit blanche_. Paul went restless from place
to place. For some months, since his mother had been worse, he had not
made love to Clara. She was, as it were, dumb to him, rather distant.
Dawes saw her very occasionally, but the two could not get an inch
across the great distance between them. The three of them were drifting
forward.

Dawes mended very slowly. He was in the convalescent home at Skegness at
Christmas, nearly well again. Paul went to the seaside for a few days.
His father was with Annie in Sheffield. Dawes came to Paul's lodgings.
His time in the home was up. The two men, between whom was such a big
reserve, seemed faithful to each other. Dawes depended on Morel now. He
knew Paul and Clara had practically separated.

"You know Clara's coming down for the day to-morrow?" he said.

The two men were at the station. Clara stepped out of the train, and
came along the platform, very erect and coldly composed. She wore a long
coat and a tweed hat. Both men hated her for her composure. Paul shook
hands with her at the barrier. Dawes was leaning against the bookstall,
watching. His black overcoat was buttoned up to the chin because of the
rain. He was pale, with almost a touch of nobility in his quietness. He
came forward, limping slightly.

Paul walked on the outside of the pavement, then Dawes, then Clara. They
made polite conversation. The sitting-room faced the sea, whose tide,
grey and shaggy, hissed not far off.

Clara took off her things and laid them on the couch. She had a slight
air of resentment. Lifting her hair with her fingers, she sat down,
rather aloof and composed. Paul ran downstairs to speak to the landlady.

"I wish you'd take your boots off," he said to Clara.

Morel sat down. Both the men seemed helpless, and each of them had a
rather hunted look. But Dawes now carried himself quietly, seemed to
yield himself, while Paul seemed to screw himself up. Clara thought she
had never seen him look so small and mean. He was as if trying to
get himself into the smallest possible compass. And as he went about
arranging, and as he sat talking, there seemed something false about him
and out of tune. Watching him unknown, she said to herself there was
no stability about him. He was fine in his way, passionate, and able to
give her drinks of pure life when he was in one mood. And now he looked
paltry and insignificant. There was nothing stable about him. Her
husband had more manly dignity. At any rate HE did not waft about with
any wind. There was something evanescent about Morel, she thought,
something shifting and false. He would never make sure ground for any
woman to stand on. She despised him rather for his shrinking together,
getting smaller. Her husband at least was manly, and when he was beaten
gave in. But this other would never own to being beaten. He would shift
round and round, prowl, get smaller. She despised him. And yet she
watched him rather than Dawes, and it seemed as if their three fates lay
in his hands. She hated him for it.

They had dinner, and sat eating nuts and drinking by the fire. Not
a serious word had been spoken. Yet Clara realised that Morel was
withdrawing from the circle, leaving her the option to stay with her
husband. It angered her. He was a mean fellow, after all, to take what
he wanted and then give her back. She did not remember that she herself
had had what she wanted, and really, at the bottom of her heart, wished
to be given back.

Paul felt crumpled up and lonely. His mother had really supported his
life. He had loved her; they two had, in fact, faced the world together.
Now she was gone, and for ever behind him was the gap in life, the tear
in the veil, through which his life seemed to drift slowly, as if he
were drawn towards death. He wanted someone of their own free initiative
to help him. The lesser things he began to let go from him, for fear of
this big thing, the lapse towards death, following in the wake of his
beloved. Clara could not stand for him to hold on to. She wanted him,
but not to understand him. He felt she wanted the man on top, not the
real him that was in trouble. That would be too much trouble to her; he
dared not give it her. She could not cope with him. It made him ashamed.
So, secretly ashamed because he was in such a mess, because his own hold
on life was so unsure, because nobody held him, feeling unsubstantial,
shadowy, as if he did not count for much in this concrete world, he drew
himself together smaller and smaller. He did not want to die; he would
not give in. But he was not afraid of death. If nobody would help, he
would go on alone.

Dawes had been driven to the extremity of life, until he was afraid. He
could go to the brink of death, he could lie on the edge and look in.
Then, cowed, afraid, he had to crawl back, and like a beggar take what
offered. There was a certain nobility in it. As Clara saw, he owned
himself beaten, and he wanted to be taken back whether or not. That she
could do for him. It was three o'clock.

"I am going by the four-twenty," said Paul again to Clara. "Are you
coming then or later?"

"Good-bye," he said to Clara.

Everything seemed to have gone smash for the young man. He could not
paint. The picture he finished on the day of his mother's death--one
that satisfied him--was the last thing he did. At work there was no
Clara. When he came home he could not take up his brushes again. There
was nothing left.

Miriam took off her things and looked round. It was a bare, severe
room. Her photo, Clara's, Annie's, were on the wall. She looked on
the drawing-board to see what he was doing. There were only a few
meaningless lines. She looked to see what books he was reading.
Evidently just an ordinary novel. The letters in the rack she saw
were from Annie, Arthur, and from some man or other she did not know.
Everything he had touched, everything that was in the least personal to
him, she examined with lingering absorption. He had been gone from her
for so long, she wanted to rediscover him, his position, what he was
now. But there was not much in the room to help her. It only made her
feel rather sad, it was so hard and comfortless.

After supper they drew up to the fire. He swung her a chair facing him,
and they sat down. She was wearing a dress of dark claret colour, that
suited her dark complexion and her large features. Still, the curls
were fine and free, but her face was much older, the brown throat much
thinner. She seemed old to him, older than Clara. Her bloom of youth had
quickly gone. A sort of stiffness, almost of woodenness, had come upon
her. She meditated a little while, then looked at him.

"And you have broken off with Clara?"

"At any rate, I could prevent you wasting yourself and being a prey to
other women--like--like Clara."

