7. Lad-and-Girl Love
8. Strife in Love
9. Defeat of Miriam
10. Clara
11. The Test on Miriam
12. Passion
13. Baxter Dawes
14. The Release
15. Derelict

Miriam flushed. She had a beautiful warm colouring.

"Oh, thank you, Miriam, then we'll come," replied her mother, almost
ingratiatingly. "Would you CARE to have tea now, Mrs. Morel?"

The boys were condescending, but Paul scarcely observed it. They went
round for eggs, scrambling into all sorts of places. As they were
feeding the fowls Miriam came out. The boys took no notice of her. One
hen, with her yellow chickens, was in a coop. Maurice took his hand full
of corn and let the hen peck from it.

He had a small hand, warm, and rather capable-looking. Miriam watched.
He held the corn to the hen. The bird eyed it with her hard, bright eye,
and suddenly made a peck into his hand. He started, and laughed. "Rap,
rap, rap!" went the bird's beak in his palm. He laughed again, and the
other boys joined.

"She knocks you, and nips you, but she never hurts," said Paul, when the
last corn had gone. "Now, Miriam," said Maurice, "you come an 'ave a
go."

Miriam was crimson with shame and misery.

The boys felt hostile to him; they were more interested in their own
pursuits. He wandered back to the house to look for his mother. As he
went round the back, he saw Miriam kneeling in front of the hen-coop,
some maize in her hand, biting her lip, and crouching in an intense
attitude. The hen was eyeing her wickedly. Very gingerly she put forward
her hand. The hen bobbed for her. She drew back quickly with a cry, half
of fear, half of chagrin.

He waited grimly, and watched. At last Miriam let the bird peck from
her hand. She gave a little cry--fear, and pain because of fear--rather
pathetic. But she had done it, and she did it again.

PAUL had been many times up to Willey Farm during the autumn. He
was friends with the two youngest boys. Edgar the eldest, would not
condescend at first. And Miriam also refused to be approached. She was
afraid of being set at nought, as by her own brothers. The girl was
romantic in her soul. Everywhere was a Walter Scott heroine being
loved by men with helmets or with plumes in their caps. She herself was
something of a princess turned into a swine-girl in her own imagination.
And she was afraid lest this boy, who, nevertheless, looked something
like a Walter Scott hero, who could paint and speak French, and knew
what algebra meant, and who went by train to Nottingham every day, might
consider her simply as the swine-girl, unable to perceive the princess
beneath; so she held aloof.

Her great companion was her mother. They were both brown-eyed, and
inclined to be mystical, such women as treasure religion inside them,
breathe it in their nostrils, and see the whole of life in a mist
thereof. So to Miriam, Christ and God made one great figure, which she
loved tremblingly and passionately when a tremendous sunset burned
out the western sky, and Ediths, and Lucys, and Rowenas, Brian de Bois
Guilberts, Rob Roys, and Guy Mannerings, rustled the sunny leaves in the
morning, or sat in her bedroom aloft, alone, when it snowed. That was
life to her. For the rest, she drudged in the house, which work she
would not have minded had not her clean red floor been mucked up
immediately by the trampling farm-boots of her brothers. She madly
wanted her little brother of four to let her swathe him and stifle
him in her love; she went to church reverently, with bowed head, and
quivered in anguish from the vulgarity of the other choir-girls and from
the common-sounding voice of the curate; she fought with her brothers,
whom she considered brutal louts; and she held not her father in too
high esteem because he did not carry any mystical ideals cherished in
his heart, but only wanted to have as easy a time as he could, and his
meals when he was ready for them.

Miriam, peeping through the kitchen window, saw the horse walk through
the big white gate into the farmyard that was backed by the oak-wood,
still bare. Then a youth in a heavy overcoat climbed down. He put up
his hands for the whip and the rug that the good-looking, ruddy farmer
handed down to him.

Miriam appeared in the doorway. She was nearly sixteen, very beautiful,
with her warm colouring, her gravity, her eyes dilating suddenly like an
ecstasy.

"Cold!" said Miriam, in her musical, caressing voice.

"Let me take the rug," said Miriam over-gently.

Miriam was moving about preparing dinner. Paul watched everything that
happened. His face was pale and thin, but his eyes were quick and bright
with life as ever. He watched the strange, almost rhapsodic way in which
the girl moved about, carrying a great stew-jar to the oven, or looking
in the saucepan. The atmosphere was different from that of his own home,
where everything seemed so ordinary. When Mr. Leivers called loudly
outside to the horse, that was reaching over to feed on the rose-bushes
in the garden, the girl started, looked round with dark eyes, as if
something had come breaking in on her world. There was a sense of
silence inside the house and out. Miriam seemed as in some dreamy tale,
a maiden in bondage, her spirit dreaming in a land far away and magical.
And her discoloured, old blue frock and her broken boots seemed only
like the romantic rags of King Cophetua's beggar-maid.

"Oh DEAR, Miriam," she cried, "these potatoes have boiled dry!"

Miriam started as if she had been stung.

"I shouldn't care, Miriam," said the mother, "if I hadn't trusted them
to you." She peered into the pan.

"It wouldn't matter but for the boys," she said to him. "Only Miriam
knows what a trouble they make if the potatoes are 'caught'."

Edgar looked in anger across at Miriam.

"What was Miriam doing that she couldn't attend to them?" he said.

Miriam looked up. Her mouth opened, her dark eyes blazed and winced, but
she said nothing. She swallowed her anger and her shame, bowing her dark
head.

"They don't forget that potato-pie against our Miriam," laughed the
father.

Miriam quarrelled with her brothers fiercely. Later in the afternoon,
when they had gone away again, her mother said:

"You disappointed me at dinner-time, Miriam."

"But they're so hateful!" cried Miriam, "and--and LOW."

"Aren't you strong enough to bear it, Miriam, if even for my sake? Are
you so weak that you must wrangle with them?"

Mrs. Leivers stuck unflinchingly to this doctrine of "the other cheek".
She could not instil it at all into the boys. With the girls she
succeeded better, and Miriam was the child of her heart. The boys
loathed the other cheek when it was presented to them. Miriam was often
sufficiently lofty to turn it. Then they spat on her and hated her. But
she walked in her proud humility, living within herself.

Miriam was her mother's daughter. In the sunshine of the afternoon
mother and daughter went down the fields with him. They looked for
nests. There was a jenny wren's in the hedge by the orchard.

The nest seemed to start into life for the two women. After that, Miriam
came to see it every day. It seemed so close to her. Again, going
down the hedgeside with the girl, he noticed the celandines, scalloped
splashes of gold, on the side of the ditch.

Miriam came later. But he had come into her life before she made any
mark on his. One dull afternoon, when the men were on the land and the
rest at school, only Miriam and her mother at home, the girl said to
him, after having hesitated for some time:

Miriam was amused that he took a swing so seriously and felt so warmly
over it.

And gradually the intimacy with the family concentrated for Paul on
three persons--the mother, Edgar, and Miriam. To the mother he went for
that sympathy and that appeal which seemed to draw him out. Edgar was
his very close friend. And to Miriam he more or less condescended,
because she seemed so humble.

Miriam looked, and was frightened. But the pine trunks were wonderful
to her, and distinct. He packed his box and rose. Suddenly he looked at
her.

Then sometimes he hated her. Her youngest brother was only five. He was
a frail lad, with immense brown eyes in his quaint fragile face--one of
Reynolds's "Choir of Angels", with a touch of elf. Often Miriam kneeled
to the child and drew him to her.

"Don't!" said the child, uneasy--"don't, Miriam!"

All the life of Miriam's body was in her eyes, which were usually dark
as a dark church, but could flame with light like a conflagration. Her
face scarcely ever altered from its look of brooding. She might have
been one of the women who went with Mary when Jesus was dead. Her body
was not flexible and living. She walked with a swing, rather heavily,
her head bowed forward, pondering. She was not clumsy, and yet none of
her movements seemed quite THE movement. Often, when wiping the dishes,
she would stand in bewilderment and chagrin because she had pulled
in two halves a cup or a tumbler. It was as if, in her fear and
self-mistrust, she put too much strength into the effort. There was
no looseness or abandon about her. Everything was gripped stiff with
intensity, and her effort, overcharged, closed in on itself.

She seemed very bitter. Paul wondered. In his own home Annie was almost
glad to be a girl. She had not so much responsibility; things were
lighter for her. She never wanted to be other than a girl. But Miriam
almost fiercely wished she were a man. And yet she hated men at the same
time.

"I'm going to teach Miriam algebra," he said.

When he went up to the farm on the Monday evening, it was drawing
twilight. Miriam was just sweeping up the kitchen, and was kneeling at
the hearth when he entered. Everyone was out but her. She looked round
at him, flushed, her dark eyes shining, her fine hair falling about her
face.

"Algebra!" repeated Edgar curiously. Then he passed on with a laugh.
Paul took a bite at his forgotten apple, looked at the miserable
cabbages in the garden, pecked into lace by the fowls, and he wanted to
pull them up. Then he glanced at Miriam. She was poring over the book,
seemed absorbed in it, yet trembling lest she could not get at it. It
made him cross. She was ruddy and beautiful. Yet her soul seemed to be
intensely supplicating. The algebra-book she closed, shrinking, knowing
he was angered; and at the same instant he grew gentle, seeing her hurt
because she did not understand.

"Paul, don't be so hard on Miriam. She may not be quick, but I'm sure
she tries."

"You don't mind me, Miriam, do you?" he asked of the girl later.

Then he often avoided her and went with Edgar. Miriam and her brother
were naturally antagonistic. Edgar was a rationalist, who was curious,
and had a sort of scientific interest in life. It was a great bitterness
to Miriam to see herself deserted by Paul for Edgar, who seemed so much
lower. But the youth was very happy with her elder brother. The two men
spent afternoons together on the land or in the loft doing carpentry,
when it rained. And they talked together, or Paul taught Edgar the songs
he himself had learned from Annie at the piano. And often all the men,
Mr. Leivers as well, had bitter debates on the nationalizing of the land
and similar problems. Paul had already heard his mother's views, and as
these were as yet his own, he argued for her. Miriam attended and
took part, but was all the time waiting until it should be over and a
personal communication might begin.

He was conscious only when stimulated. A sketch finished, he always
wanted to take it to Miriam. Then he was stimulated into knowledge of
the work he had produced unconsciously. In contact with Miriam he
gained insight; his vision went deeper. From his mother he drew the
life-warmth, the strength to produce; Miriam urged this warmth into
intensity like a white light.

One evening in the summer Miriam and he went over the fields by Herod's
Farm on their way from the library home. So it was only three miles
to Willey Farm. There was a yellow glow over the mowing-grass, and the
sorrel-heads burned crimson. Gradually, as they walked along the high
land, the gold in the west sank down to red, the red to crimson, and
then the chill blue crept up against the glow.

They came out upon the high road to Alfreton, which ran white between
the darkening fields. There Paul hesitated. It was two miles home for
him, one mile forward for Miriam. They both looked up the road that ran
in shadow right under the glow of the north-west sky. On the crest of
the hill, Selby, with its stark houses and the up-pricked headstocks of
the pit, stood in black silhouette small against the sky.

By the time they came to the pine-trees Miriam was getting very eager
and very tense. Her bush might be gone. She might not be able to find
it; and she wanted it so much. Almost passionately she wanted to be
with him when he stood before the flowers. They were going to have a
communion together--something that thrilled her, something holy. He was
walking beside her in silence. They were very near to each other. She
trembled, and he listened, vaguely anxious.

It was very still. The tree was tall and straggling. It had thrown its
briers over a hawthorn-bush, and its long streamers trailed thick, right
down to the grass, splashing the darkness everywhere with great spilt
stars, pure white. In bosses of ivory and in large splashed stars the
roses gleamed on the darkness of foliage and stems and grass. Paul and
Miriam stood close together, silent, and watched. Point after point the
steady roses shone out to them, seeming to kindle something in their
souls. The dusk came like smoke around, and still did not put out the
roses.

Paul looked into Miriam's eyes. She was pale and expectant with wonder,
her lips were parted, and her dark eyes lay open to him. His look seemed
to travel down into her. Her soul quivered. It was the communion she
wanted. He turned aside, as if pained. He turned to the bush.

Always when he went with Miriam, and it grew rather late, he knew his
mother was fretting and getting angry about him--why, he could not
understand. As he went into the house, flinging down his cap, his mother
looked up at the clock. She had been sitting thinking, because a chill
to her eyes prevented her reading. She could feel Paul being drawn away
by this girl. And she did not care for Miriam. "She is one of those who
will want to suck a man's soul out till he has none of his own left,"
she said to herself; "and he is just such a gaby as to let himself be
absorbed. She will never let him become a man; she never will." So,
while he was away with Miriam, Mrs. Morel grew more and more worked up.

He was hurt between the past glamour with Miriam and the knowledge
that his mother fretted. He had meant not to say anything, to refuse to
answer. But he could not harden his heart to ignore his mother.

He kissed her forehead that he knew so well: the deep marks between the
brows, the rising of the fine hair, greying now, and the proud setting
of the temples. His hand lingered on her shoulder after his kiss. Then
he went slowly to bed. He had forgotten Miriam; he only saw how his
mother's hair was lifted back from her warm, broad brow. And somehow,
she was hurt.

Then the next time he saw Miriam he said to her:

Miriam dropped her bead, brooding.

"Very well!" said Miriam, rather quietly, with just a touch of a sneer.

That there was any love growing between him and Miriam neither of
them would have acknowledged. He thought he was too sane for such
sentimentality, and she thought herself too lofty. They both were late
in coming to maturity, and psychical ripeness was much behind even the
physical. Miriam was exceedingly sensitive, as her mother had always
been. The slightest grossness made her recoil almost in anguish. Her
brothers were brutal, but never coarse in speech. The men did all
the discussing of farm matters outside. But, perhaps, because of the
continual business of birth and of begetting which goes on upon every
farm, Miriam was the more hypersensitive to the matter, and her blood
was chastened almost to disgust of the faintest suggestion of such
intercourse. Paul took his pitch from her, and their intimacy went on in
an utterly blanched and chaste fashion. It could never be mentioned that
the mare was in foal.

When he was nineteen, he was earning only twenty shillings a week, but
he was happy. His painting went well, and life went well enough. On the
Good Friday he organised a walk to the Hemlock Stone. There were three
lads of his own age, then Annie and Arthur, Miriam and Geoffrey. Arthur,
apprenticed as an electrician in Nottingham, was home for the holiday.
Morel, as usual, was up early, whistling and sawing in the yard. At
seven o'clock the family heard him buy threepennyworth of hot-cross
buns; he talked with gusto to the little girl who brought them, calling
her "my darling". He turned away several boys who came with more buns,
telling them they had been "kested" by a little lass. Then Mrs. Morel
got up, and the family straggled down. It was an immense luxury to
everybody, this lying in bed just beyond the ordinary time on a weekday.
And Paul and Arthur read before breakfast, and had the meal unwashed,
sitting in their shirt-sleeves. This was another holiday luxury. The
room was warm. Everything felt free of care and anxiety. There was a
sense of plenty in the house.

"See," said Paul to Miriam, "what a quiet garden!"

Then he left her again and joined the others. Soon they started home.
Miriam loitered behind, alone. She did not fit in with the others; she
could very rarely get into human relations with anyone: so her friend,
her companion, her lover, was Nature. She saw the sun declining wanly.
In the dusky, cold hedgerows were some red leaves. She lingered to
gather them, tenderly, passionately. The love in her finger-tips
caressed the leaves; the passion in her heart came to a glow upon the
leaves.

The words went through Miriam like a blade. This, then, was the
confirmation of her vision of him! She looked at him. But there was
about him a certain reserve, and she dared not comfort him, not even
speak softly to him.

And Miriam, thinking he had assured himself, felt strong in herself. She
always regarded that sudden coming upon him in the lane as a revelation.
And this conversation remained graven in her mind as one of the letters
of the law.

On the Easter Monday the same party took an excursion to Wingfield
Manor. It was great excitement to Miriam to catch a train at Sethley
Bridge, amid all the bustle of the Bank Holiday crowd. They left the
train at Alfreton. Paul was interested in the street and in the colliers
with their dogs. Here was a new race of miners. Miriam did not live till
they came to the church. They were all rather timid of entering, with
their bags of food, for fear of being turned out. Leonard, a comic, thin
fellow, went first; Paul, who would have died rather than be sent back,
went last. The place was decorated for Easter. In the font hundreds of
white narcissi seemed to be growing. The air was dim and coloured from
the windows and thrilled with a subtle scent of lilies and narcissi. In
that atmosphere Miriam's soul came into a glow. Paul was afraid of the
things he mustn't do; and he was sensitive to the feel of the place.
Miriam turned to him. He answered. They were together. He would not go
beyond the Communion-rail. She loved him for that. Her soul expanded
into prayer beside him. He felt the strange fascination of shadowy
religious places. All his latent mysticism quivered into life. She was
drawn to him. He was a prayer along with her.

Miriam very rarely talked to the other lads. They at once became awkward
in conversation with her. So usually she was silent.

"Think of the Queen going up here!" said Miriam in a low voice, as she
climbed the hollow stairs.

"You don't think she deserved it?" asked Miriam.

Round the broken top of the tower the ivy bushed out, old and handsome.
Also, there were a few chill gillivers, in pale cold bud. Miriam wanted
to lean over for some ivy, but he would not let her. Instead, she had to
wait behind him, and take from him each spray as he gathered it and held
it to her, each one separately, in the purest manner of chivalry. The
tower seemed to rock in the wind. They looked over miles and miles of
wooded country, and country with gleams of pasture.

The crypt underneath the manor was beautiful, and in perfect
preservation. Paul made a drawing: Miriam stayed with him. She was
thinking of Mary Queen of Scots looking with her strained, hopeless
eyes, that could not understand misery, over the hills whence no help
came, or sitting in this crypt, being told of a God as cold as the place
she sat in.

"Supposing you could have THAT farm," said Paul to Miriam.

They were now in the bare country of stone walls, which he loved, and
which, though only ten miles from home, seemed so foreign to Miriam. The
party was straggling. As they were crossing a large meadow that
sloped away from the sun, along a path embedded with innumerable tiny
glittering points, Paul, walking alongside, laced his fingers in the
strings of the bag Miriam was carrying, and instantly she felt Annie
behind, watchful and jealous. But the meadow was bathed in a glory of
sunshine, and the path was jewelled, and it was seldom that he gave her
any sign. She held her fingers very still among the strings of the bag,
his fingers touching; and the place was golden as a vision.

Miriam was somewhat scared by the wind, but the lads enjoyed it. They
went on, miles and miles, to Whatstandwell. All the food was eaten,
everybody was hungry, and there was very little money to get home with.
But they managed to procure a loaf and a currant-loaf, which they hacked
to pieces with shut-knives, and ate sitting on the wall near the bridge,
watching the bright Derwent rushing by, and the brakes from Matlock
pulling up at the inn.

Paul was now pale with weariness. He had been responsible for the party
all day, and now he was done. Miriam understood, and kept close to him,
and he left himself in her hands.

They got back rather late. Miriam, walking home with Geoffrey, watched
the moon rise big and red and misty. She felt something was fulfilled in
her.

She had an elder sister, Agatha, who was a school-teacher. Between the
two girls was a feud. Miriam considered Agatha worldly. And she wanted
herself to be a school-teacher.

One Saturday afternoon Agatha and Miriam were upstairs dressing. Their
bedroom was over the stable. It was a low room, not very large, and
bare. Miriam had nailed on the wall a reproduction of Veronese's "St.
Catherine". She loved the woman who sat in the window, dreaming. Her
own windows were too small to sit in. But the front one was dripped over
with honeysuckle and virginia creeper, and looked upon the tree-tops of
the oak-wood across the yard, while the little back window, no bigger
than a handkerchief, was a loophole to the east, to the dawn beating up
against the beloved round hills.

The two sisters did not talk much to each other. Agatha, who was fair
and small and determined, had rebelled against the home atmosphere,
against the doctrine of "the other cheek". She was out in the world now,
in a fair way to be independent. And she insisted on worldly values,
on appearance, on manners, on position, which Miriam would fain have
ignored.

Both girls liked to be upstairs, out of the way, when Paul came. They
preferred to come running down, open the stair-foot door, and see him
watching, expectant of them. Miriam stood painfully pulling over her
head a rosary he had given her. It caught in the fine mesh of her hair.
But at last she had it on, and the red-brown wooden beads looked well
against her cool brown neck. She was a well-developed girl, and very
handsome. But in the little looking-glass nailed against the whitewashed
wall she could only see a fragment of herself at a time. Agatha had
bought a little mirror of her own, which she propped up to suit herself.
Miriam was near the window. Suddenly she heard the well-known click of
the chain, and she saw Paul fling open the gate, push his bicycle into
the yard. She saw him look at the house, and she shrank away. He walked
in a nonchalant fashion, and his bicycle went with him as if it were a
live thing.

Miriam stood still in amazement and bewilderment.

Miriam was startled. She heard him putting his bicycle in the stable
underneath, and talking to Jimmy, who had been a pit-horse, and who was
seedy.

Agatha was dressed first, and ran downstairs. Miriam heard her greet
the lad gaily, knew exactly how brilliant her grey eyes became with that
tone. She herself would have felt it bold to have greeted him in such
wise. Yet there she stood under the self-accusation of wanting him,
tied to that stake of torture. In bitter perplexity she kneeled down and
prayed:

When she went downstairs Paul was lying back in an armchair, holding
forth with much vehemence to Agatha, who was scorning a little painting
he had brought to show her. Miriam glanced at the two, and avoided their
levity. She went into the parlour to be alone.

Miriam discontinued her practice of going each Thursday evening to the
library in Bestwood. After calling for Paul regularly during the whole
spring, a number of trifling incidents and tiny insults from his family
awakened her to their attitude towards her, and she decided to go no
more. So she announced to Paul one evening she would not call at his
house again for him on Thursday nights.

He would not have it that they were lovers. The intimacy between them
had been kept so abstract, such a matter of the soul, all thought and
weary struggle into consciousness, that he saw it only as a platonic
friendship. He stoutly denied there was anything else between them.
Miriam was silent, or else she very quietly agreed. He was a fool who
did not know what was happening to himself. By tacit agreement they
ignored the remarks and insinuations of their acquaintances.

Sometimes, as they were walking together, she slipped her arm timidly
into his. But he always resented it, and she knew it. It caused a
violent conflict in him. With Miriam he was always on the high plane of
abstraction, when his natural fire of love was transmitted into the fine
stream of thought. She would have it so. If he were jolly and, as she
put it, flippant, she waited till he came back to her, till the change
had taken place in him again, and he was wrestling with his own soul,
frowning, passionate in his desire for understanding. And in this
passion for understanding her soul lay close to his; she had him all to
herself. But he must be made abstract first.

One evening in midsummer Miriam called at the house, warm from climbing.
Paul was alone in the kitchen; his mother could be heard moving about
upstairs.

They went into the garden. The sky behind the townlet and the church was
orange-red; the flower-garden was flooded with a strange warm light that
lifted every leaf into significance. Paul passed along a fine row of
sweet-peas, gathering a blossom here and there, all cream and pale blue.
Miriam followed, breathing the fragrance. To her, flowers appealed with
such strength she felt she must make them part of herself. When she bent
and breathed a flower, it was as if she and the flower were loving each
other. Paul hated her for it. There seemed a sort of exposure about the
action, something too intimate.

Miriam laughed. She thought flowers ought to be pinned in one's dress
without any care. That Paul should take pains to fix her flowers for her
was his whim.

Miriam laughed again, but mirthlessly, to hear him thus mix her up with
women in a general way. From most men she would have ignored it. But
from him it hurt her.

Miriam picked up her books and stood in the doorway looking with chagrin
at the beautiful sunset. She would call for Paul no more, she said.

"Oh, is it you, Miriam?" replied Mrs. Morel coolly.

It was not till he was twenty years old that the family could ever
afford to go away for a holiday. Mrs. Morel had never been away for a
holiday, except to see her sister, since she had been married. Now at
last Paul had saved enough money, and they were all going. There was to
be a party: some of Annie's friends, one friend of Paul's, a young man
in the same office where William had previously been, and Miriam.

At last they got an answer from Mablethorpe, a cottage such as they
wished for thirty shillings a week. There was immense jubilation. Paul
was wild with joy for his mother's sake. She would have a real holiday
now. He and she sat at evening picturing what it would be like. Annie
came in, and Leonard, and Alice, and Kitty. There was wild rejoicing and
anticipation. Paul told Miriam. She seemed to brood with joy over it.
But the Morel's house rang with excitement.

They were to go on Saturday morning by the seven train. Paul suggested
that Miriam should sleep at his house, because it was so far for her
to walk. She came down for supper. Everybody was so excited that even
Miriam was accepted with warmth. But almost as soon as she entered the
feeling in the family became close and tight. He had discovered a poem
by Jean Ingelow which mentioned Mablethorpe, and so he must read it
to Miriam. He would never have got so far in the direction of
sentimentality as to read poetry to his own family. But now they
condescended to listen. Miriam sat on the sofa absorbed in him. She
always seemed absorbed in him, and by him, when he was present. Mrs.
Morel sat jealously in her own chair. She was going to hear also. And
even Annie and the father attended, Morel with his head cocked on one
side, like somebody listening to a sermon and feeling conscious of
the fact. Paul ducked his head over the book. He had got now all the
audience he cared for. And Mrs. Morel and Annie almost contested with
Miriam who should listen best and win his favour. He was in very high
feather.

Miriam rose to help with the pots.

And Miriam, who could not be familiar and insist, sat down again to look
at the book with Paul.

Miriam did not get much of him, except, perhaps, when all the others
went to the "Coons". Coons were insufferably stupid to Miriam, so he
thought they were to himself also, and he preached priggishly to Annie
about the fatuity of listening to them. Yet he, too, knew all their
songs, and sang them along the roads roisterously. And if he found
himself listening, the stupidity pleased him very much. Yet to Annie he
said:

"Such rot! there isn't a grain of intelligence in it. Nobody with more
gumption than a grasshopper could go and sit and listen." And to Miriam
he said, with much scorn of Annie and the others: "I suppose they're at
the 'Coons'."

It was queer to see Miriam singing coon songs. She had a straight chin
that went in a perpendicular line from the lower lip to the turn. She
always reminded Paul of some sad Botticelli angel when she sang, even
when it was:

Only when he sketched, or at evening when the others were at the
"Coons", she had him to herself. He talked to her endlessly about his
love of horizontals: how they, the great levels of sky and land in
Lincolnshire, meant to him the eternality of the will, just as the bowed
Norman arches of the church, repeating themselves, meant the dogged
leaping forward of the persistent human soul, on and on, nobody knows
where; in contradiction to the perpendicular lines and to the Gothic
arch, which, he said, leapt up at heaven and touched the ecstasy and
lost itself in the divine. Himself, he said, was Norman, Miriam was
Gothic. She bowed in consent even to that.

One evening he and she went up the great sweeping shore of sand towards
Theddlethorpe. The long breakers plunged and ran in a hiss of foam along
the coast. It was a warm evening. There was not a figure but themselves
on the far reaches of sand, no noise but the sound of the sea. Paul
loved to see it clanging at the land. He loved to feel himself between
the noise of it and the silence of the sandy shore. Miriam was with him.
Everything grew very intense. It was quite dark when they turned again.
The way home was through a gap in the sandhills, and then along a raised
grass road between two dykes. The country was black and still. From
behind the sandhills came the whisper of the sea. Paul and Miriam walked
in silence. Suddenly he started. The whole of his blood seemed to burst
into flame, and he could scarcely breathe. An enormous orange moon was
staring at them from the rim of the sandhills. He stood still, looking
at it.

"Ah!" cried Miriam, when she saw it.

"What is it?" murmured Miriam, waiting for him.

"Very well," said his mother cuttingly, "then DO as you like." And she
took no further notice of him that evening. Which he pretended neither
to notice nor to care about, but sat reading. Miriam read also,
obliterating herself. Mrs. Morel hated her for making her son like this.
She watched Paul growing irritable, priggish, and melancholic. For this
she put the blame on Miriam. Annie and all her friends joined against
the girl. Miriam had no friend of her own, only Paul. But she did not
suffer so much, because she despised the triviality of these other
people.

One day, as he was going up Castle Gate, he met Miriam. He had seen her
on the Sunday, and had not expected to meet her in town. She was walking
with a rather striking woman, blonde, with a sullen expression, and a
defiant carriage. It was strange how Miriam, in her bowed, meditative
bearing, looked dwarfed beside this woman with the handsome shoulders.
Miriam watched Paul searchingly. His gaze was on the stranger, who
ignored him. The girl saw his masculine spirit rear its head.

"No," replied Miriam, half apologetically. "I drove in to Cattle Market
with father."

"I've told you about Mrs. Dawes," said Miriam huskily; she was nervous.
"Clara, do you know Paul?"

"I think I've seen him before," replied Mrs. Dawes indifferently, as
she shook hands with him. She had scornful grey eyes, a skin like white
honey, and a full mouth, with a slightly lifted upper lip that did not
know whether it was raised in scorn of all men or out of eagerness to be
kissed, but which believed the former. She carried her head back, as if
she had drawn away in contempt, perhaps from men also. She wore a large,
dowdy hat of black beaver, and a sort of slightly affected simple dress
that made her look rather sack-like. She was evidently poor, and had not
much taste. Miriam usually looked nice.

She did not answer. He turned to Miriam.

Paul remembered that Clara Dawes was the daughter of an old friend of
Mrs. Leivers. Miriam had sought her out because she had once been Spiral
overseer at Jordan's, and because her husband, Baxter Dawes, was smith
for the factory, making the irons for cripple instruments, and so on.
Through her Miriam felt she got into direct contact with Jordan's, and
could estimate better Paul's position. But Mrs. Dawes was separated from
her husband, and had taken up Women's Rights. She was supposed to be
clever. It interested Paul.

The next time he went to see Miriam it was Saturday evening. She had
a fire in the parlour, and was waiting for him. The others, except her
father and mother and the young children, had gone out, so the two had
the parlour together. It was a long, low, warm room. There were three of
Paul's small sketches on the wall, and his photo was on the mantelpiece.
On the table and on the high old rosewood piano were bowls of coloured
leaves. He sat in the armchair, she crouched on the hearthrug near his
feet. The glow was warm on her handsome, pensive face as she kneeled
there like a devotee.

"Ay, why did she!" repeated Miriam bitterly.

Miriam bowed her head.

Miriam bowed a little lower.

He wondered why Miriam crouched there brooding in that strange way. It
irritated him.

That was more probably one of his own reasons for liking Mrs. Dawes,
but this did not occur to him. They were silent. There had come into his
forehead a knitting of the brows which was becoming habitual with him,
particularly when he was with Miriam. She longed to smooth it away, and
she was afraid of it. It seemed the stamp of a man who was not her man
in Paul Morel.

He lighted the hurricane lamp, took off his coat, turned up the bicycle,
and set speedily to work. Miriam came with the bowl of water and stood
close to him, watching. She loved to see his hands doing things. He
was slim and vigorous, with a kind of easiness even in his most hasty
movements. And busy at his work he seemed to forget her. She loved
him absorbedly. She wanted to run her hands down his sides. She always
wanted to embrace him, so long as he did not want her.

"Edgar and Miriam are coming to tea tomorrow."

He was very angry with his mother. He knew it was merely Miriam she
objected to. He flung off his boots and went to bed.

Paul went to meet his friends the next afternoon. He was glad to see
them coming. They arrived home at about four o'clock. Everywhere was
clean and still for Sunday afternoon. Mrs. Morel sat in her black dress
and black apron. She rose to meet the visitors. With Edgar she was
cordial, but with Miriam cold and rather grudging. Yet Paul thought the
girl looked so nice in her brown cashmere frock.

He helped his mother to get the tea ready. Miriam would have gladly
proffered, but was afraid. He was rather proud of his home. There was
about it now, he thought, a certain distinction. The chairs were only
wooden, and the sofa was old. But the hearthrug and cushions were
cosy; the pictures were prints in good taste; there was a simplicity in
everything, and plenty of books. He was never ashamed in the least of
his home, nor was Miriam of hers, because both were what they should be,
and warm. And then he was proud of the table; the china was pretty, the
cloth was fine. It did not matter that the spoons were not silver nor
the knives ivory-handled; everything looked nice. Mrs. Morel had managed
wonderfully while her children were growing up, so that nothing was out
of place.

Miriam talked books a little. That was her unfailing topic. But Mrs.
Morel was not cordial, and turned soon to Edgar.

At first Edgar and Miriam used to go into Mrs. Morel's pew. Morel never
went to chapel, preferring the public-house. Mrs. Morel, like a little
champion, sat at the head of her pew, Paul at the other end; and at
first Miriam sat next to him. Then the chapel was like home. It was a
pretty place, with dark pews and slim, elegant pillars, and flowers. And
the same people had sat in the same places ever since he was a boy. It
was wonderfully sweet and soothing to sit there for an hour and a half,
next to Miriam, and near to his mother, uniting his two loves under the
spell of the place of worship. Then he felt warm and happy and religious
at once. And after chapel he walked home with Miriam, whilst Mrs. Morel
spent the rest of the evening with her old friend, Mrs. Burns. He was
keenly alive on his walks on Sunday nights with Edgar and Miriam. He
never went past the pits at night, by the lighted lamp-house, the tall
black headstocks and lines of trucks, past the fans spinning slowly like
shadows, without the feeling of Miriam returning to him, keen and almost
unbearable.

At this time he was beginning to question the orthodox creed. He was
twenty-one, and she was twenty. She was beginning to dread the spring:
he became so wild, and hurt her so much. All the way he went cruelly
smashing her beliefs. Edgar enjoyed it. He was by nature critical and
rather dispassionate. But Miriam suffered exquisite pain, as, with an
intellect like a knife, the man she loved examined her religion in which
she lived and moved and had her being. But he did not spare her. He was
cruel. And when they went alone he was even more fierce, as if he would
kill her soul. He bled her beliefs till she almost lost consciousness.

And he, coming home from his walks with Miriam, was wild with torture.
He walked biting his lips and with clenched fists, going at a great
rate. Then, brought up against a stile, he stood for some minutes, and
did not move. There was a great hollow of darkness fronting him, and on
the black upslopes patches of tiny lights, and in the lowest trough of
the night, a flare of the pit. It was all weird and dreadful. Why was he
torn so, almost bewildered, and unable to move? Why did his mother sit
at home and suffer? He knew she suffered badly. But why should she? And
why did he hate Miriam, and feel so cruel towards her, at the thought
of his mother. If Miriam caused his mother suffering, then he hated
her--and he easily hated her. Why did she make him feel as if he were
uncertain of himself, insecure, an indefinite thing, as if he had not
sufficient sheathing to prevent the night and the space breaking into
him? How he hated her! And then, what a rush of tenderness and humility!

Suddenly he plunged on again, running home. His mother saw on him the
marks of some agony, and she said nothing. But he had to make her talk
to him. Then she was angry with him for going so far with Miriam.

Spring was the worst time. He was changeable, and intense and cruel.
So he decided to stay away from her. Then came the hours when he knew
Miriam was expecting him. His mother watched him growing restless.
He could not go on with his work. He could do nothing. It was as if
something were drawing his soul out towards Willey Farm. Then he put on
his hat and went, saying nothing. And his mother knew he was gone. And
as soon as he was on the way he sighed with relief. And when he was with
her he was cruel again.

One day in March he lay on the bank of Nethermere, with Miriam sitting
beside him. It was a glistening, white-and-blue day. Big clouds, so
brilliant, went by overhead, while shadows stole along on the water. The
clear spaces in the sky were of clean, cold blue. Paul lay on his back
in the old grass, looking up. He could not bear to look at Miriam. She
seemed to want him, and he resisted. He resisted all the time. He wanted
now to give her passion and tenderness, and he could not. He felt that
she wanted the soul out of his body, and not him. All his strength and
energy she drew into herself through some channel which united them. She
did not want to meet him, so that there were two of them, man and woman
together. She wanted to draw all of him into her. It urged him to an
intensity like madness, which fascinated him, as drug-taking might.

Orion was for them chief in significance among the constellations. They
had gazed at him in their strange, surcharged hours of feeling, until
they seemed themselves to live in every one of his stars. This evening
Paul had been moody and perverse. Orion had seemed just an ordinary
constellation to him. He had fought against his glamour and fascination.
Miriam was watching her lover's mood carefully. But he said nothing
that gave him away, till the moment came to part, when he stood frowning
gloomily at the gathered clouds, behind which the great constellation
must be striding still.

Miriam was astonished and hurt for him. It had cost him an effort. She
left him, wanting to spare him any further humiliation. A fine rain blew
in her face as she walked along the road. She was hurt deep down; and
she despised him for being blown about by any wind of authority. And in
her heart of hearts, unconsciously, she felt that he was trying to get
away from her. This she would never have acknowledged. She pitied him.

Still on Friday night Miriam often came down for her French lesson. Paul
did not go so frequently to Willey Farm, and she grieved at the thought
of her education's coming to end; moreover, they both loved to
be together, in spite of discords. So they read Balzac, and did
compositions, and felt highly cultured.

He remained alone working. But his usual intense concentration became
unsettled. He listened for the yard-gate. At a quarter-past seven came a
low knock, and Miriam entered.

"Yes," said Miriam. He had spoken with a touch of bitterness, and Miriam
sympathised. Money would have been nothing to HER.

He took the cloth back into the parlour. When he returned he threw to
Miriam a smaller piece. It was a cushion-cover with the same design.

He took the top loaves out, tapped them vigorously. They were done. He
put them on the hearth to cool. Then he went to the scullery, wetted his
hands, scooped the last white dough out of the punchion, and dropped it
in a baking-tin. Miriam was still bent over her painted cloth. He stood
rubbing the bits of dough from his hands.

She looked up at him, with her dark eyes one flame of love. He laughed
uncomfortably. Then he began to talk about the design. There was for him
the most intense pleasure in talking about his work to Miriam. All his
passion, all his wild blood, went into this intercourse with her,
when he talked and conceived his work. She brought forth to him his
imaginations. She did not understand, any more than a woman understands
when she conceives a child in her womb. But this was life for her and
for him.

She sat down in the armchair opposite Paul and Miriam, who were on the
sofa. Miriam moved a little farther from him. The room was hot, with a
scent of new bread. Brown, crisp loaves stood on the hearth.

"I shouldn't have expected to see you here to-night, Miriam Leivers,"
said Beatrice wickedly.

"Why not?" murmured Miriam huskily.

Miriam remained uncomfortably still.

Miriam put her feet from under her dress. Her boots had that queer,
irresolute, rather pathetic look about them, which showed how
self-conscious and self-mistrustful she was. And they were covered with
mud.

"Oh, Lord! are you going to spout foreign languages? What does it mean,
Miriam?"

There was a fine sarcasm in the last question, but Miriam did not see
it.

Miriam sat silent, withdrawn into herself. Every one of Paul's
friends delighted in taking sides against her, and he left her in the
lurch--seemed almost to have a sort of revenge upon her then.

"Are you still at school?" asked Miriam of Beatrice.

"I'd as lief be neighbours with a vixen," he said, nevertheless making
place for her between him and Miriam.

"Don't you think he does it nicely, Miriam?" she asked.

"Oh, very!" said Miriam.

He bent forward to her to light his cigarette at hers. She was winking
at him as he did so. Miriam saw his eyes trembling with mischief, and
his full, almost sensual, mouth quivering. He was not himself, and she
could not bear it. As he was now, she had no connection with him; she
might as well not have existed. She saw the cigarette dancing on his
full red lips. She hated his thick hair for being tumbled loose on his
forehead.

"Tha wunna!" she giggled, jumping up and going away. "Isn't he
shameless, Miriam?"

"Quite," said Miriam. "By the way, aren't you forgetting the bread?"

"My word, Miriam! you're in for it this time," said Beatrice.

"I!" exclaimed Miriam in amazement.

She giggled as she scraped the loaf. Even Miriam laughed in spite of
herself. Paul mended the fire ruefully.

"I suppose he's left you to settle it between you," he said. He nodded
sympathetically to Miriam, and became gently sarcastic to Beatrice.

Annie was looking in the oven. Miriam sat ignored. Paul entered.

"You had a nasty walk, didn't you, Miriam?" said Annie.

"Don't forget that bread, our Paul," cried Annie. "Good-night, Miriam. I
don't think it will rain."

"But," answered Miriam impatiently, "what is it, after all--twopence,
ha'penny."

He took the loaf back into the scullery. There was a little distance
between him and Miriam. He stood balanced opposite her for some moments
considering, thinking of his behaviour with Beatrice. He felt guilty
inside himself, and yet glad. For some inscrutable reason it served
Miriam right. He was not going to repent. She wondered what he was
thinking of as he stood suspended. His thick hair was tumbled over his
forehead. Why might she not push it back for him, and remove the marks
of Beatrice's comb? Why might she not press his body with her two hands.
It looked so firm, and every whit living. And he would let other girls,
why not her?

Miriam shyly and rather bitterly produced her exercise-book. Every week
she wrote for him a sort of diary of her inner life, in her own French.
He had found this was the only way to get her to do compositions. And
her diary was mostly a love-letter. He would read it now; she felt as
if her soul's history were going to be desecrated by him in his present
mood. He sat beside her. She watched his hand, firm and warm, rigorously
scoring her work. He was reading only the French, ignoring her soul that
was there. But gradually his hand forgot its work. He read in silence,
motionless. She quivered.

Miriam sat tremulous, half ashamed. He remained quite still, trying to
understand. He only knew she loved him. He was afraid of her love for
him. It was too good for him, and he was inadequate. His own love was
at fault, not hers. Ashamed, he corrected her work, humbly writing above
her words.

Suddenly he flung down the pencil, and was at the oven in a leap,
turning the bread. For Miriam he was too quick. She started violently,
and it hurt her with real pain. Even the way he crouched before the oven
hurt her. There seemed to be something cruel in it, something cruel in
the swift way he pitched the bread out of the tins, caught it up again.
If only he had been gentle in his movements she would have felt so rich
and warm. As it was, she was hurt.

She was really getting now the food for her life during the next week.
He made her copy Baudelaire's "Le Balcon". Then he read it for her. His
voice was soft and caressing, but growing almost brutal. He had a way of
lifting his lips and showing his teeth, passionately and bitterly, when
he was much moved. This he did now. It made Miriam feel as if he were
trampling on her. She dared not look at him, but sat with her head
bowed. She could not understand why he got into such a tumult and fury.
It made her wretched. She did not like Baudelaire, on the whole--nor
Verlaine.

Miriam looked in the bookcase, saw what postcards and letters he had
received, saw what books were there. She took one that had interested
him. Then he turned down the gas and they set off. He did not trouble to
lock the door.

"Yes, and I WOULD fetch the meat, but how was I to know. You were off
with Miriam, instead of being in when my mother came."

"You'd never notice anything," said Annie. "You're too eager to be off
with Miriam."

"Because you were engrossed with Miriam," replied Mrs. Morel hotly.

"Well, but I do now--and Miriam does--"

"Yes, I know it well--I am old. And therefore I may stand aside; I have
nothing more to do with you. You only want me to wait on you--the rest
is for Miriam."

And immediately he hated Miriam bitterly.

PAUL was dissatisfied with himself and with everything. The deepest
of his love belonged to his mother. When he felt he had hurt her, or
wounded his love for her, he could not bear it. Now it was spring, and
there was battle between him and Miriam. This year he had a good deal
against her. She was vaguely aware of it. The old feeling that she was
to be a sacrifice to this love, which she had had when she prayed, was
mingled in all her emotions. She did not at the bottom believe she
ever would have him. She did not believe in herself primarily: doubted
whether she could ever be what he would demand of her. Certainly she
never saw herself living happily through a lifetime with him. She saw
tragedy, sorrow, and sacrifice ahead. And in sacrifice she was proud,
in renunciation she was strong, for she did not trust herself to support
everyday life. She was prepared for the big things and the deep things,
like tragedy. It was the sufficiency of the small day-life she could not
trust.

He took no notice of Miriam. Later, she saw him remark her new blouse,
saw that the artist approved, but it won from him not a spark of warmth.
She was nervous, could hardly reach the teacups from the shelves.

He rose without answering. They went out into the back garden under
the budding damson-trees. The hills and the sky were clean and cold.
Everything looked washed, rather hard. Miriam glanced at Paul. He was
pale and impassive. It seemed cruel to her that his eyes and brows,
which she loved, could look so hurting.

She thought his sarcasms were unnecessary. They went forward in silence.
Round the wild, tussocky lawn at the back of the house was a thorn
hedge, under which daffodils were craning forward from among their
sheaves of grey-green blades. The cheeks of the flowers were greenish
with cold. But still some had burst, and their gold ruffled and glowed.
Miriam went on her knees before one cluster, took a wild-looking
daffodil between her hands, turned up its face of gold to her, and bowed
down, caressing it with her mouth and cheeks and brow. He stood aside,
with his hands in his pockets, watching her. One after another she
turned up to him the faces of the yellow, bursten flowers appealingly,
fondling them lavishly all the while.

Rhythmically, Miriam was swaying and stroking the flower with her mouth,
inhaling the scent which ever after made her shudder as it came to her
nostrils.

After tea he stayed with Edgar and the brothers, taking no notice of
Miriam. She, extremely unhappy on this looked-for holiday, waited for
him. And at last he yielded and came to her. She was determined to track
this mood of his to its origin. She counted it not much more than a
mood.

"Let us sit here a minute," said Miriam.

But the dog was not to be pushed away. So Paul had a little battle
with the creature, pitching poor Bill away from him, who, however,
only floundered tumultuously back again, wild with joy. The two fought
together, the man laughing grudgingly, the dog grinning all over. Miriam
watched them. There was something pathetic about the man. He wanted so
badly to love, to be tender. The rough way he bowled the dog over was
really loving. Bill got up, panting with happiness, his brown eyes
rolling in his white face, and lumbered back again. He adored Paul. The
lad frowned.

He remained staring miserably across at the hills, whose still beauty
he begrudged. He wanted to go and cycle with Edgar. Yet he had not the
courage to leave Miriam.

He had come back to his mother. Hers was the strongest tie in his life.
When he thought round, Miriam shrank away. There was a vague, unreal
feel about her. And nobody else mattered. There was one place in the
world that stood solid and did not melt into unreality: the place where
his mother was. Everybody else could grow shadowy, almost non-existent
to him, but she could not. It was as if the pivot and pole of his life,
from which he could not escape, was his mother.

And in the same way she waited for him. In him was established her life
now. After all, the life beyond offered very little to Mrs. Morel. She
saw that our chance for DOING is here, and doing counted with her. Paul
was going to prove that she had been right; he was going to make a man
whom nothing should shift off his feet; he was going to alter the face
of the earth in some way which mattered. Wherever he went she felt her
soul went with him. Whatever he did she felt her soul stood by him,
ready, as it were, to hand him his tools. She could not bear it when he
was with Miriam. William was dead. She would fight to keep Paul.

And he came back to her. And in his soul was a feeling of the
satisfaction of self-sacrifice because he was faithful to her. She loved
him first; he loved her first. And yet it was not enough. His new young
life, so strong and imperious, was urged towards something else. It made
him mad with restlessness. She saw this, and wished bitterly that Miriam
had been a woman who could take this new life of his, and leave her the
roots. He fought against his mother almost as he fought against Miriam.

It was a week before he went again to Willey Farm. Miriam had suffered
a great deal, and was afraid to see him again. Was she now to endure
the ignominy of his abandoning her? That would only be superficial
and temporary. He would come back. She held the keys to his soul. But
meanwhile, how he would torture her with his battle against her. She
shrank from it.

Miriam could not help touching the eggs, and his hand which, it seemed
to her, cradled them so well.

Bill slunk off, and Miriam wondered and dreaded what was coming. There
was a silence about the youth that made her still with apprehension. It
was not his furies, but his quiet resolutions that she feared.

Miriam was indignant at anybody's forcing the issues between them. She
had been furious with her own father for suggesting to Paul, laughingly,
that he knew why he came so much.

Miriam bowed her head moodily. She was angry at having this struggle.
People should leave him and her alone.

Now Miriam wanted to cry. And she was angry, too. He was always such a
child for people to do as they liked with.

"Oh no," replied Miriam, without looking at him.

"No, I shan't bother," said Miriam. And she meant it.

"How white Paul looks!" Mrs. Leivers exclaimed. "Miriam, you shouldn't
have let him sit out of doors. Do you think you've taken cold, Paul?"

But he felt done up. It wore him out, the conflict in himself. Miriam
pitied him now. But quite early, before nine o'clock, he rose to go.

Miriam sat in the rocking-chair, and did not speak. He hesitated,
expecting her to rise and go with him to the barn as usual for his
bicycle. She remained as she was. He was at a loss.

At this time he gave all his friendship to Edgar. He loved the family
so much, he loved the farm so much; it was the dearest place on earth to
him. His home was not so lovable. It was his mother. But then he would
have been just as happy with his mother anywhere. Whereas Willey Farm he
loved passionately. He loved the little pokey kitchen, where men's boots
tramped, and the dog slept with one eye open for fear of being trodden
on; where the lamp hung over the table at night, and everything was
so silent. He loved Miriam's long, low parlour, with its atmosphere of
romance, its flowers, its books, its high rosewood piano. He loved the
gardens and the buildings that stood with their scarlet roofs on the
naked edges of the fields, crept towards the wood as if for cosiness,
the wild country scooping down a valley and up the uncultured hills of
the other side. Only to be there was an exhilaration and a joy to him.
He loved Mrs. Leivers, with her unworldliness and her quaint cynicism;
he loved Mr. Leivers, so warm and young and lovable; he loved Edgar, who
lit up when he came, and the boys and the children and Bill--even the
sow Circe and the Indian game-cock called Tippoo. All this besides
Miriam. He could not give it up.

So he went as often, but he was usually with Edgar. Only all the family,
including the father, joined in charades and games at evening. And
later, Miriam drew them together, and they read Macbeth out of penny
books, taking parts. It was great excitement. Miriam was glad, and Mrs.
Leivers was glad, and Mr. Leivers enjoyed it. Then they all learned
songs together from tonic sol-fa, singing in a circle round the fire.
But now Paul was very rarely alone with Miriam. She waited. When she
and Edgar and he walked home together from chapel or from the literary
society in Bestwood, she knew his talk, so passionate and so unorthodox
nowadays, was for her. She did envy Edgar, however, his cycling with
Paul, his Friday nights, his days working in the fields. For her Friday
nights and her French lessons were gone. She was nearly always alone,
walking, pondering in the wood, reading, studying, dreaming, waiting.
And he wrote to her frequently.

One Sunday evening they attained to their old rare harmony. Edgar had
stayed to Communion--he wondered what it was like--with Mrs. Morel. So
Paul came on alone with Miriam to his home. He was more or less under
her spell again. As usual, they were discussing the sermon. He was
setting now full sail towards Agnosticism, but such a religious
Agnosticism that Miriam did not suffer so badly. They were at the Renan
Vie de Jesus stage. Miriam was the threshing-floor on which he threshed
out all his beliefs. While he trampled his ideas upon her soul, the
truth came out for him. She alone was his threshing-floor. She alone
helped him towards realization. Almost impassive, she submitted to
his argument and expounding. And somehow, because of her, he gradually
realized where he was wrong. And what he realized, she realized. She
felt he could not do without her.

She liked him on Sundays. Then he wore a dark suit that showed the lithe
movement of his body. There was a clean, clear-cut look about him.
He went on with his thinking to her. Suddenly he reached for a Bible.
Miriam liked the way he reached up--so sharp, straight to the mark. He
turned the pages quickly, and read her a chapter of St. John. As he sat
in the armchair reading, intent, his voice only thinking, she felt as if
he were using her unconsciously as a man uses his tools at some work he
is bent on. She loved it. And the wistfulness of his voice was like a
reaching to something, and it was as if she were what he reached with.
She sat back on the sofa away from him, and yet feeling herself the very
instrument his hand grasped. It gave her great pleasure.

Then he began to falter and to get self-conscious. And when he came to
the verse, "A woman, when she is in travail, hath sorrow because
her hour is come", he missed it out. Miriam had felt him growing
uncomfortable. She shrank when the well-known words did not follow. He
went on reading, but she did not hear. A grief and shame made her bend
her head. Six months ago he would have read it simply. Now there was a
scotch in his running with her. Now she felt there was really something
hostile between them, something of which they were ashamed.

Miriam brooded over his split with her. There was something else he
wanted. He could not be satisfied; he could give her no peace. There was
between them now always a ground for strife. She wanted to prove him.
She believed that his chief need in life was herself. If she could prove
it, both to herself and to him, the rest might go; she could simply
trust to the future.

He was rather excited at the idea of meeting Clara at Willey Farm. Mrs.
Dawes came for the day. Her heavy, dun-coloured hair was coiled on
top of her head. She wore a white blouse and navy skirt, and somehow,
wherever she was, seemed to make things look paltry and insignificant.
When she was in the room, the kitchen seemed too small and mean
altogether. Miriam's beautiful twilighty parlour looked stiff and
stupid. All the Leivers were eclipsed like candles. They found
her rather hard to put up with. Yet she was perfectly amiable, but
indifferent, and rather hard.

Paul did not come till afternoon. He was early. As he swung off his
bicycle, Miriam saw him look round at the house eagerly. He would be
disappointed if the visitor had not come. Miriam went out to meet him,
bowing her head because of the sunshine. Nasturtiums were coming out
crimson under the cool green shadow of their leaves. The girl stood,
dark-haired, glad to see him.

"Yes," replied Miriam in her musical tone. "She's reading."

"Yes," replied Miriam, as she walked at his side. "You said you'd bring
me that letter from the man at Liberty's. Have you remembered?"

He was silent. Evidently his eagerness to be early to-day had been the
newcomer. Miriam already began to suffer. They went together towards the
house. He took the clips off his trousers, but was too lazy to brush the
dust from his shoes, in spite of the socks and tie.

"What have you been doing all morning?" asked Paul of Miriam.

"Well, you see," said Miriam, coughing huskily, "Clara only came with
father--and so--she's not been here very long."

Miriam did not know this courteous Paul. Clara glanced at him.

"Why," asked Miriam, "how do you know?"

But Clara refused to answer this sally of his. He talked to Miriam for a
little while. The other woman held aloof.

"I believe," said Miriam, "he's gone for a load of coal. He should be
back directly."

Miriam dared not propose anything for the three of them. He rose and
left them.

Miriam was impatient of men. It took so little to amuse them--even Paul.
She thought it anomalous in him that he could be so thoroughly absorbed
in a triviality.

"What song was that?" asked Miriam.

"We have such jolly times," Miriam said to Clara.

"Do you like singing?" Miriam asked her.

Miriam came for him a little later to know if he would go with Clara and
her for a walk. They set off down to Strelley Mill Farm. As they were
going beside the brook, on the Willey Water side, looking through the
brake at the edge of the wood, where pink campions glowed under a few
sunbeams, they saw, beyond the tree-trunks and the thin hazel bushes,
a man leading a great bay horse through the gullies. The big red beast
seemed to dance romantically through that dimness of green hazel drift,
away there where the air was shadowy, as if it were in the past, among
the fading bluebells that might have bloomed for Deidre or Iseult.

But Clara wearied of his flippancy. Suddenly, looking at her, he saw
that the upward lifting of her face was misery and not scorn. His heart
grew tender for everybody. He turned and was gentle with Miriam, whom he
had neglected till then.

"Which?" asked Miriam, tremulous.

"Yes," answered Miriam, colouring as if she were at fault.

"Isn't he splendid!" said Miriam to her.

Miriam introduced her friends.

"Morel," said Miriam. "No, we won't come in, but we should like to go by
the mill-pond."

"You mean Miss Limb?" asked Miriam. "Yes."

"Yes," said Miriam. "It's not the right sort of life for her. I think
it's cruel to bury her there. I really ought to go and see her more.
But--she upsets me."

Clara did not answer, but strode on uphill. She was walking with her
hand hanging, her legs swinging as she kicked through the dead thistles
and the tussocky grass, her arms hanging loose. Rather than walking, her
handsome body seemed to be blundering up the hill. A hot wave went over
Paul. He was curious about her. Perhaps life had been cruel to her. He
forgot Miriam, who was walking beside him talking to him. She glanced at
him, finding he did not answer her. His eyes were fixed ahead on Clara.

"Yes," answered Miriam.

"Ah!" cried Miriam, and she looked at Paul, her dark eyes dilating. He
smiled. Together they enjoyed the field of flowers. Clara, a little way
off, was looking at the cowslips disconsolately. Paul and Miriam stayed
close together, talking in subdued tones. He kneeled on one knee,
quickly gathering the best blossoms, moving from tuft to tuft
restlessly, talking softly all the time. Miriam plucked the flowers
lovingly, lingering over them. He always seemed to her too quick and
almost scientific. Yet his bunches had a natural beauty more than hers.
He loved them, but as if they were his and he had a right to them. She
had more reverence for them: they held something she had not.

Whereupon he left her, and went stooping over the clumps of tangled
flowers which thickly sprinkled the field like pale, luminous
foam-clots. Miriam had come close. Clara was kneeling, breathing some
scent from the cowslips.

"I think," said Miriam, "if you treat them with reverence you don't do
them any harm. It is the spirit you pluck them in that matters."

Miriam was silent. He picked some more.

The evening was deepening over the earth. Already the valley was full of
shadow. One tiny square of light stood opposite at Crossleigh Bank Farm.
Brightness was swimming on the tops of the hills. Miriam came up slowly,
her face in her big, loose bunch of flowers, walking ankle-deep through
the scattered froth of the cowslips. Beyond her the trees were coming
into shape, all shadow.

Miriam murmured assent. Clara was silent.

He grew more and more restless. Miriam did not satisfy him. His old mad
desire to be with her grew weaker. Sometimes he met Clara in Nottingham,
sometimes he went to meetings with her, sometimes he saw her at Willey
Farm. But on these last occasions the situation became strained. There
was a triangle of antagonism between Paul and Clara and Miriam. With
Clara he took on a smart, worldly, mocking tone very antagonistic to
Miriam. It did not matter what went before. She might be intimate and
sad with him. Then as soon as Clara appeared, it all vanished, and he
played to the newcomer.

Miriam had one beautiful evening with him in the hay. He had been on
the horse-rake, and having finished, came to help her to put the hay in
cocks. Then he talked to her of his hopes and despairs, and his whole
soul seemed to lie bare before her. She felt as if she watched the very
quivering stuff of life in him. The moon came out: they walked home
together: he seemed to have come to her because he needed her so badly,
and she listened to him, gave him all her love and her faith. It seemed
to her he brought her the best of himself to keep, and that she would
guard it all her life. Nay, the sky did not cherish the stars more
surely and eternally than she would guard the good in the soul of Paul
Morel. She went on home alone, feeling exalted, glad in her faith.

And then, the next day, Clara came. They were to have tea in the
hayfield. Miriam watched the evening drawing to gold and shadow. And all
the time Paul was sporting with Clara. He made higher and higher heaps
of hay that they were jumping over. Miriam did not care for the game,
and stood aside. Edgar and Geoffrey and Maurice and Clara and Paul
jumped. Paul won, because he was light. Clara's blood was roused. She
could run like an Amazon. Paul loved the determined way she rushed at
the hay-cock and leaped, landed on the other side, her breasts shaken,
her thick hair come undone.

And again he laughed, in a way that tortured Miriam.

She turned her back on him. Yet everybody could see that the only person
she listened to, or was conscious of, was he, and he of her. It pleased
the men to see this battle between them. But Miriam was tortured.

Paul could choose the lesser in place of the higher, she saw. He could
be unfaithful to himself, unfaithful to the real, deep Paul Morel.
There was a danger of his becoming frivolous, of his running after his
satisfaction like any Arthur, or like his father. It made Miriam bitter
to think that he should throw away his soul for this flippant traffic of
triviality with Clara. She walked in bitterness and silence, while the
other two rallied each other, and Paul sported.

And afterwards, he would not own it, but he was rather ashamed of
himself, and prostrated himself before Miriam. Then again he rebelled.

But Miriam knew that one should be religious in everything, have God,
whatever God might be, present in everything.

Miriam read this letter twice, after which she sealed it up. A year
later she broke the seal to show her mother the letter.

This was the end of the first phase of Paul's love affair. He was now
about twenty-three years old, and, though still virgin, the sex instinct
that Miriam had over-refined for so long now grew particularly strong.
Often, as he talked to Clara Dawes, came that thickening and quickening
of his blood, that peculiar concentration in the breast, as if something
were alive there, a new self or a new centre of consciousness, warning
him that sooner or later he would have to ask one woman or another. But
he belonged to Miriam. Of that she was so fixedly sure that he allowed
her right.

"I don't believe there's a jot more life from Miriam than you could get
from any educated girl--say Miss Moreton. It is YOU who are snobbish
about class."

Now she began to combat him in his restless fretting. He still kept up
his connection with Miriam, could neither break free nor go the whole
length of engagement. And this indecision seemed to bleed him of his
energy. Moreover, his mother suspected him of an unrecognised leaning
towards Clara, and, since the latter was a married woman, she wished he
would fall in love with one of the girls in a better station of life.
But he was stupid, and would refuse to love or even to admire a girl
much, just because she was his social superior.

He frowned. His mother caught him on the raw of his wound of Miriam.
He pushed the tumbled hair off his forehead, his eyes full of pain and
fire.

Mrs. Morel felt as if her heart would break for him. At this rate she
knew he would not live. He had that poignant carelessness about himself,
his own suffering, his own life, which is a form of slow suicide. It
almost broke her heart. With all the passion of her strong nature she
hated Miriam for having in this subtle way undermined his joy. It did
not matter to her that Miriam could not help it. Miriam did it, and she
hated her.

He drifted away from Miriam imperceptibly, without knowing he was going.
Arthur only left the army to be married. The baby was born six months
after his wedding. Mrs. Morel got him a job under the firm again, at
twenty-one shillings a week. She furnished for him, with the help of
Beatrice's mother, a little cottage of two rooms. He was caught now. It
did not matter how he kicked and struggled, he was fast. For a time he
chafed, was irritable with his young wife, who loved him; he went almost
distracted when the baby, which was delicate, cried or gave trouble. He
grumbled for hours to his mother. She only said: "Well, my lad, you did
it yourself, now you must make the best of it." And then the grit
came out in him. He buckled to work, undertook his responsibilities,
acknowledged that he belonged to his wife and child, and did make a good
best of it. He had never been very closely inbound into the family. Now
he was gone altogether.

"And you've been going with Miriam Leivers?" the mother asked him.

During the ten years that she had belonged to the women's movement
she had acquired a fair amount of education, and, having had some of
Miriam's passion to be instructed, had taught herself French, and could
read in that language with a struggle. She considered herself as a woman
apart, and particularly apart, from her class. The girls in the Spiral
department were all of good homes. It was a small, special industry, and
had a certain distinction. There was an air of refinement in both rooms.
But Clara was aloof also from her fellow-workers.

When he celebrated his twenty-third birthday, the house was in trouble.
Arthur was just going to be married. His mother was not well. His
father, getting an old man, and lame from his accidents, was given
a paltry, poor job. Miriam was an eternal reproach. He felt he owed
himself to her, yet could not give himself. The house, moreover, needed
his support. He was pulled in all directions. He was not glad it was his
birthday. It made him bitter.

They walked out together very often at dinner-time; it was quite open,
quite frank. Everybody seemed to feel that he was quite unaware of the
state of his own feeling, and that nothing was wrong. He talked to her
now with some of the old fervour with which he had talked to Miriam, but
he cared less about the talk; he did not bother about his conclusions.

He was like so many young men of his own age. Sex had become so
complicated in him that he would have denied that he ever could want
Clara or Miriam or any woman whom he knew. Sex desire was a sort of
detached thing, that did not belong to a woman. He loved Miriam with his
soul. He grew warm at the thought of Clara, he battled with her, he
knew the curves of her breast and shoulders as if they had been moulded
inside him; and yet he did not positively desire her. He would have
denied it for ever. He believed himself really bound to Miriam. If ever
he should marry, some time in the far future, it would be his duty to
marry Miriam. That he gave Clara to understand, and she said nothing,
but left him to his courses. He came to her, Mrs. Dawes, whenever
he could. Then he wrote frequently to Miriam, and visited the girl
occasionally. So he went on through the winter; but he seemed not so
fretted. His mother was easier about him. She thought he was getting
away from Miriam.

Miriam knew now how strong was the attraction of Clara for him; but
still she was certain that the best in him would triumph. His feeling
for Mrs. Dawes--who, moreover, was a married woman--was shallow and
temporal, compared with his love for herself. He would come back to her,
she was sure; with some of his young freshness gone, perhaps, but cured
of his desire for the lesser things which other women than herself could
give him. She could bear all if he were inwardly true to her and must
come back.

He saw none of the anomaly of his position. Miriam was his old friend,
lover, and she belonged to Bestwood and home and his youth. Clara was a
newer friend, and she belonged to Nottingham, to life, to the world. It
seemed to him quite plain.

She very rarely saw Miriam now. The friendship between the two women was
not broken off, but considerably weakened.

"You know," he said, "Miriam and I have been a lot to each other ever
since I was sixteen--that's seven years now."

WITH the spring came again the old madness and battle. Now he knew he
would have to go to Miriam. But what was his reluctance? He told himself
it was only a sort of overstrong virginity in her and him which neither
could break through. He might have married her; but his circumstances
at home made it difficult, and, moreover, he did not want to marry.
Marriage was for life, and because they had become close companions, he
and she, he did not see that it should inevitably follow they should be
man and wife. He did not feel that he wanted marriage with Miriam. He
wished he did. He would have given his head to have felt a joyous desire
to marry her and to have her. Then why couldn't he bring it off? There
was some obstacle; and what was the obstacle? It lay in the physical
bondage. He shrank from the physical contact. But why? With her he felt
bound up inside himself. He could not go out to her. Something struggled
in him, but he could not get to her. Why? She loved him. Clara said she
even wanted him; then why couldn't he go to her, make love to her, kiss
her? Why, when she put her arm in his, timidly, as they walked, did he
feel he would burst forth in brutality and recoil? He owed himself to
her; he wanted to belong to her. Perhaps the recoil and the shrinking
from her was love in its first fierce modesty. He had no aversion for
her. No, it was the opposite; it was a strong desire battling with a
still stronger shyness and virginity. It seemed as if virginity were a
positive force, which fought and won in both of them. And with her he
felt it so hard to overcome; yet he was nearest to her, and with her
alone could he deliberately break through. And he owed himself to her.
Then, if they could get things right, they could marry; but he would not
marry unless he could feel strong in the joy of it--never. He could not
have faced his mother. It seemed to him that to sacrifice himself in
a marriage he did not want would be degrading, and would undo all his
life, make it a nullity. He would try what he COULD do.

And he had a great tenderness for Miriam. Always, she was sad, dreaming
her religion; and he was nearly a religion to her. He could not bear to
fail her. It would all come right if they tried.

He went back to her. Something in her, when he looked at her, brought
the tears almost to his eyes. One day he stood behind her as she sang.
Annie was playing a song on the piano. As Miriam sang her mouth seemed
hopeless. She sang like a nun singing to heaven. It reminded him so much
of the mouth and eyes of one who sings beside a Botticelli Madonna, so
spiritual. Again, hot as steel, came up the pain in him. Why must he ask
her for the other thing? Why was there his blood battling with her? If
only he could have been always gentle, tender with her, breathing with
her the atmosphere of reverie and religious dreams, he would give
his right hand. It was not fair to hurt her. There seemed an eternal
maidenhood about her; and when he thought of her mother, he saw the
great brown eyes of a maiden who was nearly scared and shocked out of
her virgin maidenhood, but not quite, in spite of her seven children.
They had been born almost leaving her out of count, not of her, but upon
her. So she could never let them go, because she never had possessed
them.

Mrs. Morel saw him going again frequently to Miriam, and was astonished.
He said nothing to his mother. He did not explain nor excuse himself. If
he came home late, and she reproached him, he frowned and turned on her
in an overbearing way:

And she went to bed, leaving the door unlocked for him; but she lay
listening until he came, often long after. It was a great bitterness
to her that he had gone back to Miriam. She recognised, however, the
uselessness of any further interference. He went to Willey Farm as a
man now, not as a youth. She had no right over him. There was a coldness
between him and her. He hardly told her anything. Discarded, she waited
on him, cooked for him still, and loved to slave for him; but her face
closed again like a mask. There was nothing for her to do now but the
housework; for all the rest he had gone to Miriam. She could not forgive
him. Miriam killed the joy and the warmth in him. He had been such a
jolly lad, and full of the warmest affection; now he grew colder, more
and more irritable and gloomy. It reminded her of William; but Paul was
worse. He did things with more intensity, and more realisation of what
he was about. His mother knew how he was suffering for want of a woman,
and she saw him going to Miriam. If he had made up his mind, nothing
on earth would alter him. Mrs. Morel was tired. She began to give up at
last; she had finished. She was in the way.

He lay back in the rocking-chair at Willey Farm one evening. He had been
talking to Miriam for some weeks, but had not come to the point. Now he
said suddenly:

"I don't know," replied Miriam.

Miriam plunged home over the meadows. She was not afraid of people, what
they might say; but she dreaded the issue with him. Yes, she would
let him have her if he insisted; and then, when she thought of it
afterwards, her heart went down. He would be disappointed, he would find
no satisfaction, and then he would go away. Yet he was so insistent; and
over this, which did not seem so all-important to her, was their love
to break down. After all, he was only like other men, seeking his
satisfaction. Oh, but there was something more in him, something deeper!
She could trust to it, in spite of all desires. He said that possession
was a great moment in life. All strong emotions concentrated there.
Perhaps it was so. There was something divine in it; then she would
submit, religiously, to the sacrifice. He should have her. And at
the thought her whole body clenched itself involuntarily, hard, as if
against something; but Life forced her through this gate of suffering,
too, and she would submit. At any rate, it would give him what he
wanted, which was her deepest wish. She brooded and brooded and brooded
herself towards accepting him.

Miriam came out wondering.

Beside her, on the rhubarb leaves, were four dead birds, thieves that
had been shot. Paul saw some cherry stones hanging quite bleached, like
skeletons, picked clear of flesh. He looked down again to Miriam.

"They are lovely," said Miriam, fingering the cherries.

"We must go," said Miriam.

"The rain is coming in on us," said Miriam.

About this time Miriam's grandmother, who lived in a tiny cottage in
Woodlinton, fell ill, and the girl was sent to keep house. It was a
beautiful little place. The cottage had a big garden in front, with
red brick walls, against which the plum trees were nailed. At the back
another garden was separated from the fields by a tall old hedge. It
was very pretty. Miriam had not much to do, so she found time for her
beloved reading, and for writing little introspective pieces which
interested her.

At the holiday-time her grandmother, being better, was driven to Derby
to stay with her daughter for a day or two. She was a crotchety old
lady, and might return the second day or the third; so Miriam stayed
alone in the cottage, which also pleased her.

He got to the cottage at about eleven o'clock. Miriam was busy preparing
dinner. She looked so perfectly in keeping with the little kitchen,
ruddy and busy. He kissed her and sat down to watch. The room was small
and cosy. The sofa was covered all over with a sort of linen in squares
of red and pale blue, old, much washed, but pretty. There was a stuffed
owl in a case over a corner cupboard. The sunlight came through the
leaves of the scented geraniums in the window. She was cooking a chicken
in his honour. It was their cottage for the day, and they were man and
wife. He beat the eggs for her and peeled the potatoes. He thought she
gave a feeling of home almost like his mother; and no one could look
more beautiful, with her tumbled curls, when she was flushed from the
fire.

He spent the week with Miriam, and wore her out with his passion before
it was gone. He had always, almost wilfully, to put her out of count,
and act from the brute strength of his own feelings. And he could not do
it often, and there remained afterwards always the sense of failure and
of death. If he were really with her, he had to put aside himself and
his desire. If he would have her, he had to put her aside.

"I shan't go so much to Miriam's, mother."

He continued faithful to Miriam. For one day he had loved her utterly.
But it never came again. The sense of failure grew stronger. At first it
was only a sadness. Then he began to feel he could not go on. He wanted
to run, to go abroad, anything. Gradually he ceased to ask her to have
him. Instead of drawing them together, it put them apart. And then he
realised, consciously, that it was no good. It was useless trying: it
would never be a success between them.

For some months he had seen very little of Clara. They had occasionally
walked out for half an hour at dinner-time. But he always reserved
himself for Miriam. With Clara, however, his brow cleared, and he
was gay again. She treated him indulgently, as if he were a child. He
thought he did not mind. But deep below the surface it piqued him.

Sometimes Miriam said:

But insidiously, without his knowing it, the warmth he felt for Clara
drew him away from Miriam, for whom he felt responsible, and to whom he
felt he belonged. He thought he was being quite faithful to her. It was
not easy to estimate exactly the strength and warmth of one's feelings
for a woman till they have run away with one.

He began to give more time to his men friends. There was Jessop, at the
art school; Swain, who was chemistry demonstrator at the university;
Newton, who was a teacher; besides Edgar and Miriam's younger brothers.
Pleading work, he sketched and studied with Jessop. He called in the
university for Swain, and the two went "down town" together. Having come
home in the train with Newton, he called and had a game of billiards
with him in the Moon and Stars. If he gave to Miriam the excuse of his
men friends, he felt quite justified. His mother began to be relieved.
He always told her where he had been.

He made sketches of her hand and arm, and the drawings contained some
of the fascination the real thing had for him. Miriam, who always went
scrupulously through his books and papers, saw the drawings.

Frequently he hated Miriam. He hated her as she bent forward and pored
over his things. He hated her way of patiently casting him up, as if he
were an endless psychological account. When he was with her, he hated
her for having got him, and yet not got him, and he tortured her. She
took all and gave nothing, he said. At least, she gave no living warmth.
She was never alive, and giving off life. Looking for her was like
looking for something which did not exist. She was only his conscience,
not his mate. He hated her violently, and was more cruel to her. They
dragged on till the next summer. He saw more and more of Clara.

At last he spoke. He had been sitting working at home one evening. There
was between him and his mother a peculiar condition of people frankly
finding fault with each other. Mrs. Morel was strong on her feet again.
He was not going to stick to Miriam. Very well; then she would stand
aloof till he said something. It had been coming a long time, this
bursting of the storm in him, when he would come back to her. This
evening there was between them a peculiar condition of suspense.
He worked feverishly and mechanically, so that he could escape from
himself. It grew late. Through the open door, stealthily, came the scent
of madonna lilies, almost as if it were prowling abroad. Suddenly he got
up and went out of doors.

"I shall break off with Miriam, mother," he answered calmly.

On Sunday he went up to the farm in the early afternoon. He had written
Miriam that they would walk over the fields to Hucknall. His mother was
very tender with him. He said nothing. But she saw the effort it was
costing. The peculiar set look on his face stilled her.

Miriam met him at the lane-end. She was wearing a new dress of figured
muslin that had short sleeves. Those short sleeves, and Miriam's
brown-skinned arms beneath them--such pitiful, resigned arms--gave him
so much pain that they helped to make him cruel. She had made herself
look so beautiful and fresh for him. She seemed to blossom for him
alone. Every time he looked at her--a mature young woman now, and
beautiful in her new dress--it hurt so much that his heart seemed almost
to be bursting with the restraint he put on it. But he had decided, and
it was irrevocable.

His mother looked at him. He had forgotten Miriam now. He told her
about the girls in the Willow Tree. Mrs. Morel looked at him. It seemed
unreal, his gaiety. At the back of it was too much horror and misery.

After leaving Miriam he went almost straight to Clara. On the Monday
following the day of the rupture he went down to the work-room. She
looked up at him and smiled. They had grown very intimate unawares. She
saw a new brightness about him.

"Shall you tell Miriam?" she replied sarcastically.

"Why," she asked at length, in rather a jarring tone, "did you leave
Miriam?"

"You didn't want to marry Miriam, or you didn't want to marry at all?"
she asked.

"Miriam? She said I was a baby of four, and that I always HAD battled
her off."

Occasionally he still walked a little way from chapel with Miriam and
Edgar. He did not go up to the farm. She, however, was very much the
same with him, and he did not feel embarrassed in her presence. One
evening she was alone when he accompanied her. They began by talking
books: it was their unfailing topic. Mrs. Morel had said that his and
Miriam's affair was like a fire fed on books--if there were no more
volumes it would die out. Miriam, for her part, boasted that she could
read him like a book, could place her finger any minute on the chapter
and the line. He, easily taken in, believed that Miriam knew more about
him than anyone else. So it pleased him to talk to her about himself,
like the simplest egoist. Very soon the conversation drifted to his own
doings. It flattered him immensely that he was of such supreme interest.

"It was not very nice weather," said Miriam, "was it?"

Miriam bowed her head and brooded. He was quite unconscious of
concealing anything from her.

Miriam put her finger in her mouth.

"And how IS Clara?" asked Miriam.

"It's so unjust!" said Miriam. "The man does as he likes--"

Another day, when he saw Miriam, the conversation turned to marriage,
then to Clara's marriage with Dawes.

"It was something like your mother and father," said Miriam.

"Yes," said Miriam.

"No," said Miriam.

"What happened, exactly?" asked Miriam.

Miriam pondered this. She saw what he was seeking--a sort of baptism of
fire in passion, it seemed to her. She realised that he would never be
satisfied till he had it. Perhaps it was essential to him, as to some
men, to sow wild oats; and afterwards, when he was satisfied, he would
not rage with restlessness any more, but could settle down and give her
his life into her hands. Well, then, if he must go, let him go and have
his fill--something big and intense, he called it. At any rate, when he
had got it, he would not want it--that he said himself; he would want
the other thing that she could give him. He would want to be owned, so
that he could work. It seemed to her a bitter thing that he must go, but
she could let him go into an inn for a glass of whisky, so she could let
him go to Clara, so long as it was something that would satisfy a need
in him, and leave him free for herself to possess.

At that moment Miriam was entering through the garden-door. She saw
Clara go up to him, saw him turn, and saw them come to rest together.
Something in their perfect isolation together made her know that it was
accomplished between them, that they were, as she put it, married. She
walked very slowly down the cinder-track of the long garden.

They looked into each other's eyes, laughing. At that moment they became
aware of Miriam. There was a click, and everything had altered.

"Hello, Miriam!" he exclaimed. "You said you'd come!"

"This is pretty, isn't it?" said Miriam.

Then Miriam realised that Clara was accepted as she had never been.

Miriam laughed shortly, and Clara turned impatiently aside.

"Yes; they are very fine," replied Miriam.

"Look, Miriam; these are the white ones that came from your garden. They
aren't so fine here, are they?"

"No," said Miriam.

While they were out there the bells began to ring in the church,
sounding loud across the town and the field. Miriam looked at the tower,
proud among the clustering roofs, and remembered the sketches he had
brought her. It had been different then, but he had not left her even
yet. She asked him for a book to read. He ran indoors.

"What! is that Miriam?" asked his mother coldly.

"You've not seen Mrs. Morel before?" Miriam was saying to Clara.

"Yes," said Miriam, dropping her head; "in some ways she's very fine."

"When will you want it back?" Miriam asked.

Clara turned to go indoors, whilst he accompanied Miriam to the gate.

"Oh, very well!" exclaimed Miriam rather bitterly, turning away.

"Ah, I shall see you, then!" Miriam was very bitter.

"What I hate is the bloodhound quality in Miriam."

His heart went hot, and he was angry with them for talking about the
girl. What right had they to say that? Something in the speech itself
stung him into a flame of hate against Miriam. Then his own heart
rebelled furiously at Clara's taking the liberty of speaking so about
Miriam. After all, the girl was the better woman of the two, he thought,
if it came to goodness. He went indoors. His mother looked excited. She
was beating with her hand rhythmically on the sofa-arm, as women do who
are wearing out. He could never bear to see the movement. There was a
silence; then he began to talk.

In chapel Miriam saw him find the place in the hymn-book for Clara, in
exactly the same way as he used for herself. And during the sermon he
could see the girl across the chapel, her hat throwing a dark shadow
over her face. What did she think, seeing Clara with him? He did not
stop to consider. He felt himself cruel towards Miriam.

After chapel he went over Pentrich with Clara. It was a dark autumn
night. They had said good-bye to Miriam, and his heart had smitten him
as he left the girl alone. "But it serves her right," he said inside
himself, and it almost gave him pleasure to go off under her eyes with
this other handsome woman.

Up Pentrich Hill Clara leaned against him as he went. He slid his arm
round her waist. Feeling the strong motion of her body under his arm as
she walked, the tightness in his chest because of Miriam relaxed, and
the hot blood bathed him. He held her closer and closer.

Then: "You still keep on with Miriam," she said quietly.

"Because I said I would be friends with Miriam!" he exclaimed.

"You'd better run after Miriam," mocked Clara.

"Yet she's as much sense as Miriam."

"Perhaps; and I love her better than Miriam. But WHY don't they hold
me?"

"But no, mother. I even love Clara, and I did Miriam; but to GIVE myself
to them in marriage I couldn't. I couldn't belong to them. They seem to
want ME, and I can't ever give it them."

"I hope so; but love should give a sense of freedom, not of prison.
Miriam made me feel tied up like a donkey to a stake. I must feed on her
patch, and nowhere else. It's sickening!"

Another day Miriam came, but she seemed almost like a stranger to him.

The two young men set off gaily for Blackpool. Mrs. Morel was quite
lively as Paul kissed her and left her. Once at the station, he forgot
everything. Four days were clear--not an anxiety, not a thought. The two
young men simply enjoyed themselves. Paul was like another man. None of
himself remained--no Clara, no Miriam, no mother that fretted him. He
wrote to them all, and long letters to his mother; but they were jolly
letters that made her laugh. He was having a good time, as young fellows
will in a place like Blackpool. And underneath it all was a shadow for
her.

Still the days and the weeks went by. He hardly ever went to see Clara
now. But he wandered restlessly from one person to another for some
help, and there was none anywhere. Miriam had written to him tenderly.
He went to see her. Her heart was very sore when she saw him, white,
gaunt, with his eyes dark and bewildered. Her pity came up, hurting her
till she could not bear it.

Miriam shuddered. She drew him to her; she pressed him to her bosom; she
kissed him and kissed him. He submitted, but it was torture. She could
not kiss his agony. That remained alone and apart. She kissed his face,
and roused his blood, while his soul was apart writhing with the agony
of death. And she kissed him and fingered his body, till at last,
feeling he would go mad, he got away from her. It was not what he wanted
just then--not that. And she thought she had soothed him and done him
good.

"Miriam?"

He was very thin and lantern-jawed. He dared not meet his own eyes
in the mirror; he never looked at himself. He wanted to get away from
himself, but there was nothing to get hold of. In despair he thought of
Miriam. Perhaps--perhaps--?

Miriam took off her things and looked round. It was a bare, severe
room. Her photo, Clara's, Annie's, were on the wall. She looked on
the drawing-board to see what he was doing. There were only a few
meaningless lines. She looked to see what books he was reading.
Evidently just an ordinary novel. The letters in the rack she saw
were from Annie, Arthur, and from some man or other she did not know.
Everything he had touched, everything that was in the least personal to
him, she examined with lingering absorption. He had been gone from her
for so long, she wanted to rediscover him, his position, what he was
now. But there was not much in the room to help her. It only made her
feel rather sad, it was so hard and comfortless.

She sat very quiet. He lit a cigarette. The smoke went up from it,
wavering. He was thinking of his mother, and had forgotten Miriam. She
suddenly looked at him. Her bitterness came surging up. Her sacrifice,
then, was useless. He lay there aloof, careless about her. Suddenly
she saw again his lack of religion, his restless instability. He would
destroy himself like a perverse child. Well, then, he would!

