across my dorm room. Words had started swimming off the page, circling my head, the letters doing
one-eighties as if they were riding skateboards. There was no way I was going to remember the
difference between Chiron and Charon, or Polydictes and Polydeuces. And conjugating those Latin
verbs? Forget it.
I paced the room, feeling like ants were crawling around inside my shirt.
I remembered Mr. Brunner’s serious expression, his thousand-year-old eyes. I will accept only
the best from you, Percy Jackson.
I took a deep breath. I picked up the mythology book.
I’d never asked a teacher for help before. Maybe if I talked to Mr. Brunner, he could give me
some pointers. At least I could apologize for the big fat F I was about to score on his exam. I didn’t
want to leave Yancy Academy with him thinking I hadn’t tried.
I walked downstairs to the faculty offices. Most of them were dark and empty, but Mr. Brunner’s
door was ajar, light from his window stretching across the hallway floor.
I was three steps from the door handle when I heard voices inside the office. Mr. Brunner asked a
question. A voice that was definitely Grover’s said “… worried about Percy, sir.”
I froze.
I’m not usually an eavesdropper, but I dare you to try not listening if you hear your best friend
talking about you to an adult.
I inched closer.
“… alone this summer,” Grover was saying. “I mean, a Kindly One in the school! Now that we
know for sure, and they know too-“
“We would only make matters worse by rushing him,” Mr. Brunner said. “We need the boy to
mature more.”
“But he may not have time. The summer solstice deadline- “
“Will have to be resolved without him, Grover. Let him enjoy his ignorance while he still can.”
“Sir, he saw her… .”
“His imagination,” Mr. Brunner insisted. “The Mist over the students and staff will be enough to
convince him of that.”
“Sir, I … I can’t fail in my duties again.” Grover’s voice was choked with emotion. “You know
what that would mean.”
“You haven’t failed, Grover,” Mr. Brunner said kindly. “I should have seen her for what she was.
Now let’s just worry about keeping Percy alive until next fall-“
The mythology book dropped out of my hand and hit the floor with a thud.
Mr. Brunner went silent.
My heart hammering, I picked up the book and backed down the hall.
A shadow slid across the lighted glass of Brunner’s office door, the shadow of something much
taller than my wheelchair-bound teacher, holding something that looked suspiciously like an archer’s
bow.
I opened the nearest door and slipped inside.
A few seconds later I heard a slow clop-clop-clop, like muffled wood blocks, then a sound like
an animal snuffling right outside my door. A large, dark shape paused in front of the glass, then moved
on.
A bead of sweat trickled down my neck.
Somewhere in the hallway, Mr. Brunner spoke. “Nothing,” he murmured. “My nerves haven’t
been right since the winter solstice.”

“That’s good,” he said. “That’s good. I don’t think you could risk drinking any more of that stuff”
“What do you mean?”
He took the empty glass from me gingerly, as if it were dynamite, and set it back on the table.
“Come on. Chiron and Mr. D are waiting.”
The porch wrapped all the way around the farmhouse.
My legs felt wobbly, trying to walk that far. Grover offered to carry the Minotaur horn, but I held
on to it. I’d paid for that souvenir the hard way. I wasn’t going to let it go.
As we came around the opposite end of the house, I caught my breath.
We must’ve been on the north shore of Long Island, because on this side of the house, the valley
marched all the way up to the water, which glittered about a mile in the distance. Between here and
there, I simply couldn’t process everything I was seeing. The landscape was dotted with buildings
that looked like ancient Greek architecture-an open-air pavilion, an amphitheater, a circular arenaexcept that they all looked brand new, their white marble columns sparkling in the sun. In a nearby
sandpit, a dozen high school-age kids and satyrs played volleyball. Canoes glided across a small
lake. Kids in bright orange T-shirts like Grover’s were chasing each other around a cluster of cabins
nestled in the woods. Some shot targets at an archery range. Others rode horses down a wooded trail,
and, unless I was hallucinating, some of their horses had wings.
Down at the end of the porch, two men sat across from each other at a card table. The blondhaired girl who’d spoon-fed me popcorn-flavored pudding was leaning on the porch rail next to them.
The man facing me was small, but porky. He had a red nose, big watery eyes, and curly hair so
black it was almost purple. He looked like those paintings of baby angels- what do you call them,
hubbubs? No, cherubs. That’s it. He looked like a cherub who’d turned middle-aged in a trailer park.
He wore a tiger-pattern Hawaiian shirt, and he would’ve fit right in at one of Gabe’s poker parties,
except I got the feeling this guy could’ve out-gambled even my stepfather.
“That’s Mr. D,” Grover murmured to me. “He’s the camp director. Be polite. The girl, that’s
Annabeth Chase. She’s just a camper, but she’s been here longer than just about anybody. And you
already know Chiron… .”
He pointed at the guy whose back was to me.
First, I realized he was sitting in the wheelchair. Then I recognized the tweed jacket, the thinning
brown hair, the scraggly beard.
“Mr. Brunner!” I cried.
The Latin teacher turned and smiled at me. His eyes had that mischievous glint they sometimes got
in class when he pulled a pop quiz and made all the multiple choice answers B.
“Ah, good, Percy,” he said. “Now we have four for pinochle.”
He offered me a chair to the right of Mr. D, who looked at me with bloodshot eyes and heaved a
great sigh. “Oh, I suppose I must say it. Welcome to Camp Half-Blood. There. Now, don’t expect me
to be glad to see you.”
“Uh, thanks.” I scooted a little farther away from him because, if there was one thing I had learned
from living with Gabe, it was how to tell when an adult has been hitting the happy juice. If Mr. D was
a stranger to alcohol, I was a satyr.
“Annabeth?” Mr. Brunner called to the blond girl.
She came forward and Mr. Brunner introduced us. “This young lady nursed you back to health,
Percy. Annabeth, my dear, why don’t you go check on Percy’s bunk? We’ll be putting him in cabin
eleven for now.”
Annabeth said, “Sure, Chiron.”

She was probably my age, maybe a couple of inches taller, and a whole lot more athletic looking.
With her deep tan and her curly blond hair, she was almost exactly what I thought a stereotypical
California girl would look like, except her eyes ruined the image. They were startling gray, like storm
clouds; pretty, but intimidating, too, as if she were analyzing the best way to take me down in a fight.
She glanced at the minotaur horn in my hands, then back at me. I imagined she was going to say,
You killed a minotaur! or Wow, you’re so awesome! or something like that.
Instead she said, “You drool when you sleep.”
Then she sprinted off down the lawn, her blond hair flying behind her.
“So,” I said, anxious to change the subject. “You, uh, work here, Mr. Brunner?”
“Not Mr. Brunner,” the ex-Mr. Brunner said. “I’m afraid that was a pseudonym. You may call me
Chiron.”
“Okay.” Totally confused, I looked at the director. “And Mr. D … does that stand for something?”
Mr. D stopped shuffling the cards. He looked at me like I’d just belched loudly. “Young man,
names are powerful things. You don’t just go around using them for no reason.”
“Oh. Right. Sorry.”
“I must say, Percy,” Chiron-Brunner broke in, “I’m glad to see you alive. It’s been a long time
since I’ve made a house call to a potential camper. I’d hate to think I’ve wasted my time.”
“House call?”
“My year at Yancy Academy, to instruct you. We have satyrs at most schools, of course, keeping a
lookout. But Grover alerted me as soon as he met you. He sensed you were something special, so I
decided to come upstate. I convinced the other Latin teacher to … ah, take a leave of absence.”
I tried to remember the beginning of the school year. It seemed like so long ago, but I did have a
fuzzy memory of there being another Latin teacher my first week at Yancy. Then, without explanation,
he had disappeared and Mr. Brunner had taken the class.
“You came to Yancy just to teach me?” I asked.
Chiron nodded. “Honestly, I wasn’t sure about you at first. We contacted your mother, let her
know we were keeping an eye on you in case you were ready for Camp Half-Blood. But you still had
so much to learn. Nevertheless, you made it here alive, and that’s always the first test.”
“Grover,” Mr. D said impatiently, “are you playing or not?”
“Yes, sir!” Grover trembled as he took the fourth chair, though I didn’t know why he should be so
afraid of a pudgy little man in a tiger-print Hawaiian shirt.
“You do know how to play pinochle?” Mr. D eyed me suspiciously.
“I’m afraid not,” I said.
“I’m afraid not, sir,” he said.
“Sir,” I repeated. I was liking the camp director less and less.
“Well,” he told me, “it is, along with gladiator fighting and Pac-Man, one of the greatest games
ever invented by humans. I would expect all civilized young men to know the rules.”
“I’m sure the boy can learn,” Chiron said.
“Please,” I said, “what is this place? What am I doing here? Mr. Brun-Chiron-why would you go
to Yancy Academy just to teach me?”
Mr. D snorted. “I asked the same question.”
The camp director dealt the cards. Grover flinched every time one landed in his pile.
Chiron smiled at me sympathetically, the way he used to in Latin class, as if to let me know that
no matter what my average was, I was his star student. He expected me to have the right answer.
“Percy,” he said. “Did your mother tell you nothing?’

“She said …” I remembered her sad eyes, looking out over the sea. “She told me she was afraid
to send me here, even though my father had wanted her to. She said that once I was here, I probably
couldn’t leave. She wanted to keep me close to her.”
“Typical,” Mr. D said. “That’s how they usually get killed. Young man, are you bidding or not?”
“What?” I asked.
He explained, impatiently, how you bid in pinochle, and so I did.
“I’m afraid there’s too much to tell,” Chiron said. “I’m afraid our usual orientation film won’t be
sufficient.”
“Orientation film?” I asked.
“No,” Chiron decided. “Well, Percy. You know your friend Grover is a satyr. You know”-he
pointed to the horn in the shoe box-“that you have killed the Minotaur. No small feat, either, lad. What
you may not know is that great powers are at work in your life. Gods-the forces you call the Greek
gods-are very much alive.”
I stared at the others around the table.
I waited for somebody to yell, Not! But all I got was Mr. D yelling, “Oh, a royal marriage. Trick!
Trick!” He cackled as he tallied up his points.
“Mr. D,” Grover asked timidly, “if you’re not going to eat it, could I have your Diet Coke can?”
“Eh? Oh, all right.”
Grover bit a huge shard out of the empty aluminum can and chewed it mournfully.
“Wait,” I told Chiron. “You’re telling me there’s such a thing as God.”
“Well, now,” Chiron said. “God-capital G, God. That’s a different matter altogether. We shan’t
deal with the metaphysical.”
“Metaphysical? But you were just talking about-“
“Ah, gods, plural, as in, great beings that control the forces of nature and human endeavors: the
immortal gods of Olympus. That’s a smaller matter.”
“Smaller?”
“Yes, quite. The gods we discussed in Latin class.”
“Zeus,” I said. “Hera. Apollo. You mean them.”
And there it was again-distant thunder on a cloudless day.
“Young man,” said Mr. D, “I would really be less casual about throwing those names around, if I
were you.”
“But they’re stories,” I said. “They’re-myths, to explain lightning and the seasons and stuff.
They’re what people believed before there was science.”
“Science!” Mr. D scoffed. “And tell me, Perseus Jackson”-I flinched when he said my real name,
which I never told anybody-“what will people think of your ’science’ two thousand years from now?”
Mr. D continued. “Hmm? They will call it primitive mumbo jumbo. That’s what. Oh, I love mortalsthey have absolutely no sense of perspective. They think they’ve come so-o-o far. And have they,
Chiron? Look at this boy and tell me.”
I wasn’t liking Mr. D much, but there was something about the way he called me mortal, as if…
he wasn’t. It was enough to put a lump in my throat, to suggest why Grover was dutifully minding his
cards, chewing his soda can, and keeping his mouth shut.
“Percy,” Chiron said, “you may choose to believe or not, but the fact is that immortal means
immortal. Can you imagine that for a moment, never dying? Never fading? Existing, just as you are,
for all time?”
I was about to answer, off the top of my head, that it sounded like a pretty good deal, but the tone

of Chiron’s voice made me hesitate.
“You mean, whether people believed in you or not,” I said.
“Exactly,” Chiron agreed. “If you were a god, how would you like being called a myth, an old
story to explain lightning? What if I told you, Perseus Jackson, that someday people would call you a
myth, just created to explain how little boys can get over losing their mothers?”
My heart pounded. He was trying to make me angry for some reason, but I wasn’t going to let him.
I said, “I wouldn’t like it. But I don’t believe in gods.”
“Oh, you’d better,” Mr. D murmured. “Before one of them incinerates you.”
Grover said, “P-please, sir. He’s just lost his mother. He’s in shock.”
“A lucky thing, too,” Mr. D grumbled, playing a card. “Bad enough I’m confined to this miserable
job, working with boys who don’t even believe.’”
He waved his hand and a goblet appeared on the table, as if the sunlight had bent, momentarily,
and woven the air into glass. The goblet filled itself with red wine.
My jaw dropped, but Chiron hardly looked up.
“Mr. D,” he warned, “your restrictions.”
Mr. D looked at the wine and feigned surprise.
“Dear me.” He looked at the sky and yelled, “Old habits! Sorry!”
More thunder.
Mr. D waved his hand again, and the wineglass changed into a fresh can of Diet Coke. He sighed
unhappily, popped the top of the soda, and went back to his card game.
Chiron winked at me. “Mr. D offended his father a while back, took a fancy to a wood nymph who
had been declared off-limits.”
“A wood nymph,” I repeated, still staring at the Diet Coke can like it was from outer space.
“Yes,” Mr. D confessed. “Father loves to punish me. The first time, Prohibition. Ghastly!
Absolutely horrid ten years! The second time-well, she really was pretty, and I couldn’t stay awaythe second time, he sent me here. Half-Blood Hill. Summer camp for brats like you. ‘Be a better
influence,’ he told me. ‘Work with youths rather than tearing them down.’ Ha.’ Absolutely unfair.”
Mr. D sounded about six years old, like a pouting little kid.
“And …” I stammered, “your father is …”
“Di immortales, Chiron,” Mr. D said. “I thought you taught this boy the basics. My father is Zeus,
of course.”
I ran through D names from Greek mythology. Wine. The skin of a tiger. The satyrs that all seemed
to work here. The way Grover cringed, as if Mr. D were his master.
“You’re Dionysus,” I said. “The god of wine.”
Mr. D rolled his eyes. “What do they say, these days, Grover? Do the children say, ‘Well, duh!’?”
“Y-yes, Mr. D.”
“Then, well, duh! Percy Jackson. Did you think I was Aphrodite, perhaps?”
“You’re a god.”
“Yes, child.”
“A god. You.”
He turned to look at me straight on, and I saw a kind of purplish fire in his eyes, a hint that this
whiny, plump little man was only showing me the tiniest bit of his true nature. I saw visions of grape
vines choking unbelievers to death, drunken warriors insane with battle lust, sailors screaming as
their hands turned to flippers, their faces elongating into dolphin snouts. I knew that if I pushed him,
Mr. D would show me worse things. He would plant a disease in my brain that would leave me

wearing a strait-jacket in a rubber room for the rest of my life.
“Would you like to test me, child?” he said quietly.
“No. No, sir.”
The fire died a little. He turned back to his card game. “I believe I win.”
“Not quite, Mr. D,” Chiron said. He set down a straight, tallied the points, and said, “The game
goes to me.”
I thought Mr. D was going to vaporize Chiron right out of his wheelchair, but he just sighed
through his nose, as if he were used to being beaten by the Latin teacher. He got up, and Grover rose,
too.
“I’m tired,” Mr. D said. “I believe I’ll take a nap before the sing-along tonight. But first, Grover,
we need to talk, again, about your less-than-perfect performance on this assignment.”
Grover’s face beaded with sweat. “Y-yes, sir.”
Mr. D turned to me. “Cabin eleven, Percy Jackson. And mind your manners.”
He swept into the farmhouse, Grover following miserably.
“Will Grover be okay?” I asked Chiron.
Chiron nodded, though he looked a bit troubled. “Old Dionysus isn’t really mad. He just hates his
job. He’s been … ah, grounded, I guess you would say, and he can’t stand waiting another century
before he’s allowed to go back to Olympus.”
“Mount Olympus,” I said. “You’re telling me there really is a palace there?”
“Well now, there’s Mount Olympus in Greece. And then there’s the home of the gods, the
convergence point of their powers, which did indeed used to be on Mount Olympus. It’s still called
Mount Olympus, out of respect to the old ways, but the palace moves, Percy, just as the gods do.”
“You mean the Greek gods are here? Like … in America?”
“Well, certainly. The gods move with the heart of the West.”
“The what?”
“Come now, Percy. What you call ‘Western civilization.’ Do you think it’s just an abstract
concept? No, it’s a living force. A collective consciousness that has burned bright for thousands of
years. The gods are part of it. You might even say they are the source of it, or at least, they are tied so
tightly to it that they couldn’t possibly fade, not unless all of Western civilization were obliterated.
The fire started in Greece. Then, as you well know-or as I hope you know, since you passed my
course-the heart of the fire moved to Rome, and so did the gods. Oh, different names, perhaps-Jupiter
for Zeus, Venus for Aphrodite, and so on-but the same forces, the same gods.”
“And then they died.”
“Died? No. Did the West die? The gods simply moved, to Germany, to France, to Spain, for a
while. Wherever the flame was brightest, the gods were there. They spent several centuries in
England. All you need to do is look at the architecture. People do not forget the gods. Every place
they’ve ruled, for the last three thousand years, you can see them in paintings, in statues, on the most
important buildings. And yes, Percy, of course they are now in your United States. Look at your
symbol, the eagle of Zeus. Look at the statue of Prometheus in Rockefeller Center, the Greek facades
of your government buildings in Washington. I defy you to find any American city where the
Olympians are not prominently displayed in multiple places. Like it or not-and believe me, plenty of
people weren’t very fond of Rome, either-America is now the heart of the flame. It is the great power
of the West. And so Olympus is here. And we are here.”
It was all too much, especially the fact that I seemed to be included in Chiron’s we, as if I were
part of some club.

“Who are you, Chiron? Who … who am I?”
Chiron smiled. He shifted his weight as if he were going to get up out of his wheelchair, but I
knew that was impossible. He was paralyzed from the waist down.
“Who are you?” he mused. “Well, that’s the question we all want answered, isn’t it? But for now,
we should get you a bunk in cabin eleven. There will be new friends to meet. And plenty of time for
lessons tomorrow. Besides, there will be s’mores at the campfire tonight, and I simply adore
chocolate.”
And then he did rise from his wheelchair. But there was something odd about the way he did it.
His blanket fell away from his legs, but the legs didn’t move. His waist kept getting longer, rising
above his belt. At first, I thought he was wearing very long, white velvet underwear, but as he kept
rising out of the chair, taller than any man, I realized that the velvet underwear wasn’t underwear; it
was the front of an animal, muscle and sinew under coarse white fur. And the wheelchair wasn’t a
chair. It was some kind of container, an enormous box on wheels, and it must’ve been magic, because
there’s no way it could’ve held all of him. A leg came out, long and knobby-kneed, with a huge
polished hoof. Then another front leg, then hindquarters, and then the box was empty, nothing but a
metal shell with a couple of fake human legs attached.
I stared at the horse who had just sprung from the wheelchair: a huge white stallion. But where its
neck should be was the upper body of my Latin teacher, smoothly grafted to the horse’s trunk.
“What a relief,” the centaur said. “I’d been cooped up in there so long, my fetlocks had fallen
asleep. Now, come, Percy Jackson. Let’s meet the other campers.”

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
6 I BECOME SUPREME LORD
OF THE BATHROOM
Once I got over the fact that my Latin teacher was a horse, we had a nice tour, though I was
careful not to walk behind him. I’d done pooper-scooper patrol in the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day
Parade a few times, and, I’m sorry, I did not trust Chiron’s back end the way I trusted his front.
We passed the volleyball pit. Several of the campers nudged each other. One pointed to the
minotaur horn I was carrying. Another said, “That’s him.”
Most of the campers were older than me. Their satyr friends were bigger than Grover, all of them
trotting around in orange CAMP HALF-BLOOD T-shirts, with nothing else to cover their bare shaggy
hindquarters. I wasn’t normally shy, but the way they stared at me made me uncomfortable. I felt like
they were expecting me to do a flip or something.
I looked back at the farmhouse. It was a lot bigger than I’d realized-four stories tall, sky blue with
white trim, like an upscale seaside resort. I was checking out the brass eagle weather vane on top
when something caught my eye, a shadow in the uppermost window of the attic gable. Something had
moved the curtain, just for a second, and I got the distinct impression I was being watched.
“What’s up there?” I asked Chiron.
He looked where I was pointing, and his smile faded. “Just the attic.”
“Somebody lives there?”
“No,” he said with finality. “Not a single living thing.”
I got the feeling he was being truthful. But I was also sure something had moved that curtain.
“Come along, Percy,” Chiron said, his lighthearted tone now a little forced. “Lots to see.”
We walked through the strawberry fields, where campers were picking bushels of berries while a
satyr played a tune on a reed pipe.
Chiron told me the camp grew a nice crop for export to New York restaurants and Mount
Olympus. “It pays our expenses,” he explained. “And the strawberries take almost no effort.”
He said Mr. D had this effect on fruit-bearing plants: they just went crazy when he was around. It
worked best with wine grapes, but Mr. D was restricted from growing those, so they grew
strawberries instead.
I watched the satyr playing his pipe. His music was causing lines of bugs to leave the strawberry
patch in every direction, like refugees fleeing a fire. I wondered if Grover could work that kind of
magic with music. I wondered if he was still inside the farmhouse, getting chewed out by Mr. D.
“Grover won’t get in too much trouble, will he?” I asked Chiron. “I mean … he was a good
protector. Really.”
Chiron sighed. He shed his tweed jacket and draped it over his horses back like a saddle.
“Grover has big dreams, Percy. Perhaps bigger than are reasonable. To reach his goal, he must first
demonstrate great courage by succeeding as a keeper, finding a new camper and bringing him safely
to Half-Blood Hill.”
“But he did that!”
“I might agree with you,” Chiron said. “But it is not my place to judge. Dionysus and the Council
of Cloven Elders must decide. I’m afraid they might not see this assignment as a success. After all,

Grover lost you in New York. Then there’s the unfortunate … ah … fate of your mother. And the fact
that Grover was unconscious when you dragged him over the property line. The council might
question whether this shows any courage on Grover’s part.”
I wanted to protest. None of what happened was Grover’s fault. I also felt really, really guilty. If I
hadn’t given Grover the slip at the bus station, he might not have gotten in trouble.
“He’ll get a second chance, won’t he?”
Chiron winced. “I’m afraid that was Grover’s second chance, Percy. The council was not anxious
to give him another, either, after what happened the first time, five years ago. Olympus knows, I
advised him to wait longer before trying again. He’s still so small for his age… .”
“How old is he?”
“Oh, twenty-eight.”
“What! And he’s in sixth grade?”
“Satyrs mature half as fast as humans, Percy. Grover has been the equivalent of a middle school
student for the past six years.”
“That’s horrible.”
“Quite,” Chiron agreed. “At any rate, Grover is a late bloomer, even by satyr standards, and not
yet very accomplished at woodland magic. Alas, he was anxious to pursue his dream. Perhaps now he
will find some other career… .”
“That’s not fair,” I said. “What happened the first time? Was it really so bad?”
Chiron looked away quickly. “Let’s move along, shall we?”
But I wasn’t quite ready to let the subject drop. Something had occurred to me when Chiron talked
about my mother’s fate, as if he were intentionally avoiding the word death. The beginnings of an
idea-a tiny, hopeful fire-started forming in my mind.
“Chiron,” I said. “If the gods and Olympus and all that are real …”
“Yes, child?”
“Does that mean the Underworld is real, too?”
Chiron’s expression darkened.
“Yes, child.” He paused, as if choosing his words carefully. “There is a place where spirits go
after death. But for now … until we know more … I would urge you to put that out of your mind.”
“What do you mean, ‘until we know more’?”
“Come, Percy. Let’s see the woods.”
As we got closer, I realized how huge the forest was. It took up at least a quarter of the valley,
with trees so tall and thick, you could imagine nobody had been in there since the Native Americans.
Chiron said, “The woods are stocked, if you care to try your luck, but go armed.”
“Stocked with what?” I asked. “Armed with what?”
“You’ll see. Capture the flag is Friday night. Do you have your own sword and shield?”
“My own-?”
“No,” Chiron said. “I don’t suppose you do. I think a size five will do. I’ll visit the armory later.”
I wanted to ask what kind of summer camp had an armory, but there was too much else to think
about, so the tour continued. We saw the archery range, the canoeing lake, the stables (which Chiron
didn’t seem to like very much), the javelin range, the sing-along amphitheater, and the arena where
Chiron said they held sword and spear fights.
“Sword and spear fights?” I asked.
“Cabin challenges and all that,” he explained. “Not lethal. Usually. Oh, yes, and there’s the mess
hall.”

Chiron pointed to an outdoor pavilion framed in white Grecian columns on a hill overlooking the
sea. There were a dozen stone picnic tables. No roof. No walls.
“What do you do when it rains?” I asked.
Chiron looked at me as if I’d gone a little weird. “We still have to eat, don’t we?” I decided to
drop the subject.
Finally, he showed me the cabins. There were twelve of them, nestled in the woods by the lake.
They were arranged in a U, with two at the base and five in a row on either side. And they were
without doubt the most bizarre collection of buildings I’d ever seen.
Except for the fact that each had a large brass number above the door (odds on the left side, evens
on the right), they looked absolutely nothing alike. Number nine had smokestacks, like a tiny factory.
Number four had tomato vines on the walls and a roof made out of real grass. Seven seemed to be
made of solid gold, which gleamed so much in the sunlight it was almost impossible to look at. They
all faced a commons area about the size of a soccer field, dotted with Greek statues, fountains, flower
beds, and a couple of basketball hoops (which were more my speed).
In the center of the field was a huge stone-lined firepit. Even though it was a warm afternoon, the
hearth smoldered. A girl about nine years old was tending the flames, poking the coals with a stick.
The pair of cabins at the head of the field, numbers one and two, looked like his-and-hers
mausoleums, big white marble boxes with heavy columns in front. Cabin one was the biggest and
bulkiest of the twelve. Its polished bronze doors shimmered like a hologram, so that from different
angles lightning bolts seemed to streak across them. Cabin two was more graceful somehow, with
slimmer columns garlanded with pomegranates and flowers. The walls were carved with images of
peacocks.
“Zeus and Hera?” I guessed.
“Correct,” Chiron said.
“Their cabins look empty.”
“Several of the cabins are. That’s true. No one ever stays in one or two.”
Okay. So each cabin had a different god, like a mascot. Twelve cabins for the twelve Olympians.
But why would some be empty?
I stopped in front of the first cabin on the left, cabin three.
It wasn’t high and mighty like cabin one, but long and low and solid. The outer walls were of
rough gray stone studded with pieces of seashell and coral, as if the slabs had been hewn straight
from the bottom of the ocean floor. I peeked inside the open doorway and Chiron said, “Oh, I
wouldn’t do that!”
Before he could pull me back, I caught the salty scent of the interior, like the wind on the shore at
Montauk. The interior walls glowed like abalone. There were six empty bunk beds with silk sheets
turned down. But there was no sign anyone had ever slept there. The place felt so sad and lonely, I
was glad when Chiron put his hand on my shoulder and said, “Come along, Percy.”
Most of the other cabins were crowded with campers.
Number five was bright red-a real nasty paint job, as if the color had been splashed on with
buckets and fists. The roof was lined with barbed wire. A stuffed wild boar’s head hung over the
doorway, and its eyes seemed to follow me. Inside I could see a bunch of mean-looking kids, both
girls and boys, arm wrestling and arguing with each other while rock music blared. The loudest was a
girl maybe thirteen or fourteen. She wore a size XXXL CAMP HALF-BLOOD T-shirt under a
camouflage jacket. She zeroed in on me and gave me an evil sneer. She reminded me of Nancy
Bobofit, though the camper girl was much bigger and tougher looking, and her hair was long and

stringy, and brown instead of red.
I kept walking, trying to stay clear of Chiron’s hooves. “We haven’t seen any other centaurs,” I
observed.
“No,” said Chiron sadly. “My kinsmen are a wild and barbaric folk, I’m afraid. You might
encounter them in the wilderness, or at major sporting events. But you won’t see any here.”
“You said your name was Chiron. Are you really …”
He smiled down at me. “The Chiron from the stories? Trainer of Hercules and all that? Yes,
Percy, I am.”
“But, shouldn’t you be dead?”
Chiron paused, as if the question intrigued him. “I honestly don’t know about should be. The truth
is, I can’t be dead. You see, eons ago the gods granted my wish. I could continue the work I loved. I
could be a teacher of heroes as long as humanity needed me. I gained much from that wish … and I
gave up much. But I’m still here, so I can only assume I’m still needed.”
I thought about being a teacher for three thousand years. It wouldn’t have made my Top Ten
Things to Wish For list.
“Doesn’t it ever get boring?”
“No, no,” he said. “Horribly depressing, at times, but never boring.”
“Why depressing?”
Chiron seemed to turn hard of hearing again.
“Oh, look,” he said. “Annabeth is waiting for us.”
***
The blond girl I’d met at the Big House was reading a book in front of the last cabin on the left,
number eleven.
When we reached her, she looked me over critically, like she was still thinking about how much I
drooled.
I tried to see what she was reading, but I couldn’t make out the title. I thought my dyslexia was
acting up. Then I realized the title wasn’t even English. The letters looked Greek to me. I mean,
literally Greek. There were pictures of temples and statues and different kinds of columns, like those
in an architecture book.
“Annabeth,” Chiron said, “I have masters’ archery class at noon. Would you take Percy from
here?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Cabin eleven,” Chiron told me, gesturing toward the doorway. “Make yourself at home.”
Out of all the cabins, eleven looked the most like a regular old summer camp cabin, with the
emphasis on old. The threshold was worn down, the brown paint peeling. Over the doorway was one
of those doctor’s symbols, a winged pole with two snakes wrapped around it. What did they call it…
? A caduceus.
Inside, it was packed with people, both boys and girls, way more than the number of bunk beds.
Sleeping bags were spread all over on the floor. It looked like a gym where the Red Cross had set up
an evacuation center.
Chiron didn’t go in. The door was too low for him. But when the campers saw him they all stood
and bowed respectfully.
“Well, then,” Chiron said. “Good luck, Percy. I’ll see you at dinner.”
He galloped away toward the archery range.
I stood in the doorway, looking at the kids. They weren’t bowing anymore. They were staring at

“Then there’s only one.”
“Yes.”
“And he died, like, a gajillion years ago, right? Theseus killed him in the labyrinth. So …”
“Monsters don’t die, Percy. They can be killed. But they don’t die.”
“Oh, thanks. That clears it up.”
“They don’t have souls, like you and me. You can dispel them for a while, maybe even for a
whole lifetime if you’re lucky. But they are primal forces. Chiron calls them archetypes. Eventually,
they re-form.”
I thought about Mrs. Dodds. “You mean if I killed one, accidentally, with a sword-“
“The Fur … I mean, your math teacher. That’s right. She’s still out there. You just made her very,
very mad.”
“How did you know about Mrs. Dodds?”
“You talk in your sleep.”
“You almost called her something. A Fury? They’re Hades’ torturers, right?”
Annabeth glanced nervously at the ground, as if she expected it to open up and swallow her. “You
shouldn’t call them by name, even here. We call them the Kindly Ones, if we have to speak of them at
all.”
“Look, is there anything we can say without it thundering?” I sounded whiny, even to myself, but
right then I didn’t care. “Why do I have to stay in cabin eleven, anyway? Why is everybody so
crowded together? There are plenty of empty bunks right over there.”
I pointed to the first few cabins, and Annabeth turned pale. “You don’t just choose a cabin, Percy.
It depends on who your parents are. Or … your parent.”
She stared at me, waiting for me to get it.
“My mom is Sally Jackson,” I said. “She works at the candy store in Grand Central Station. At
least, she used to.”
“I’m sorry about your mom, Percy. But that’s not what I mean. I’m talking about your other parent.
Your dad.”
“He’s dead. I never knew him.”
Annabeth sighed. Clearly, she’d had this conversation before with other kids. “Your father’s not
dead, Percy.”
“How can you say that? You know him?”
“No, of course not.”
“Then how can you say-“
“Because I know you. You wouldn’t be here if you weren’t one of us.”
“You don’t know anything about me.”
“No?” She raised an eyebrow. “I bet you moved around from school to school. I bet you were
kicked out of a lot of them.”
“How-“
“Diagnosed with dyslexia. Probably ADHD, too.”
I tried to swallow my embarrassment. “What does that have to do with anything?”
“Taken together, it’s almost a sure sign. The letters float off the page when you read, right? That’s
because your mind is hardwired for ancient Greek. And the ADHD-you’re impulsive, can’t sit still in
the classroom. That’s your battlefield reflexes. In a real fight, they’d keep you alive. As for the
attention problems, that’s because you see too much, Percy, not too little. Your senses are better than
a regular mortal’s. Of course the teachers want you medicated. Most of them are monsters. They don’t

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
7 MY DINNER GOES
UP IN SMOKE
Word of the bathroom incident spread immediately. Wherever I went, campers pointed at me and
murmured something about toilet water. Or maybe they were just staring at Annabeth, who was still
pretty much dripping wet.
She showed me a few more places: the metal shop (where kids were forging their own swords),
the arts-and-crafts room (where satyrs were sandblasting a giant marble statue of a goat-man), and the
climbing wall, which actually consisted of two facing walls that shook violently, dropped boulders,
sprayed lava, and clashed together if you didn’t get to the top fast enough.
Finally we returned to the canoeing lake, where the trail led back to the cabins.
“I’ve got training to do,” Annabeth said flatly. “Dinner’s at seven-thirty. Just follow your cabin to
the mess hall.”
“Annabeth, I’m sorry about the toilets.”
“Whatever.”
“It wasn’t my fault.”
She looked at me skeptically, and I realized it was my fault. I’d made water shoot out of the
bathroom fixtures. I didn’t understand how. But the toilets had responded to me. I had become one
with the plumbing.
“You need to talk to the Oracle,” Annabeth said.
“Who?”
“Not who. What. The Oracle. I’ll ask Chiron.”
I stared into the lake, wishing somebody would give me a straight answer for once.
I wasn’t expecting anybody to be looking back at me from the bottom, so my heart skipped a beat
when I noticed two teenage girls sitting cross-legged at the base of the pier, about twenty feet below.
They wore blue jeans and shimmering green T-shirts, and their brown hair floated loose around their
shoulders as minnows darted in and out. They smiled and waved as if I were a long-lost friend.
I didn’t know what else to do. I waved back.
“Don’t encourage them,” Annabeth warned. “Naiads are terrible flirts.”
“Naiads,” I repeated, feeling completely overwhelmed. “That’s it. I want to go home now.”
Annabeth frowned. “Don’t you get it, Percy? You are home. This is the only safe place on earth
for kids like us.”
“You mean, mentally disturbed kids?”
“I mean not human. Not totally human, anyway. Half-human.”
“Half-human and half-what?”
“I think you know.”
I didn’t want to admit it, but I was afraid I did. I felt a tingling in my limbs, a sensation I
sometimes felt when my mom talked about my dad.
“God,” I said. “Half-god.”
Annabeth nodded. “Your father isn’t dead, Percy. He’s one of the Olympians.”
“That’s … crazy.”

“Is it? What’s the most common thing gods did in the old stories? They ran around falling in love
with humans and having kids with them. Do you think they’ve changed their habits in the last few
millennia?”
“But those are just-” I almost said myths again. Then I remembered Chiron’s warning that in two
thousand years, I might be considered a myth. “But if all the kids here are half-gods-“
“Demigods,” Annabeth said. “That’s the official term. Or half-bloods.”
“Then who’s your dad?”
Her hands tightened around the pier railing. I got the feeling I’d just trespassed on a sensitive
subject.
“My dad is a professor at West Point,” she said. “I haven’t seen him since I was very small. He
teaches American history.”
“He’s human.”
“What? You assume it has to be a male god who finds a human female attractive? How sexist is
that?”
“Who’s your mom, then?”
“Cabin six.”
“Meaning?”
Annabeth straightened. “Athena. Goddess of wisdom and battle.”
Okay, I thought. Why not?
“And my dad?”
“Undetermined,” Annabeth said, “like I told you before. Nobody knows.”
“Except my mother. She knew.”
“Maybe not, Percy. Gods don’t always reveal their identities.”
“My dad would have. He loved her.”
Annabeth gave me a cautious look. She didn’t want to burst my bubble. “Maybe you’re right.
Maybe he’ll send a sign. That’s the only way to know for sure: your father has to send you a sign
claiming you as his son. Sometimes it happens.
“You mean sometimes it doesn’t?”
Annabeth ran her palm along the rail. “The gods are busy. They have a lot of kids and they don’t
always … Well, sometimes they don’t care about us, Percy. They ignore us.”
I thought about some of the kids I’d seen in the Hermes cabin, teenagers who looked sullen and
depressed, as if they were waiting for a call that would never come. I’d known kids like that at Yancy
Academy, shuffled off to boarding school by rich parents who didn’t have the time to deal with them.
But gods should behave better.
“So I’m stuck here,” I said. “That’s it? For the rest of my life?”
“It depends,” Annabeth said. “Some campers only stay the summer. If you’re a child of Aphrodite
or Demeter, you’re probably not a real powerful force. The monsters might ignore you, so you can get
by with a few months of summer training and live in the mortal world the rest of the year. But for
some of us, it’s too dangerous to leave. We’re year-rounders. In the mortal world, we attract
monsters. They sense us. They come to challenge us. Most of the time, they’ll ignore us until we’re
old enough to cause trouble-about ten or eleven years old, but after that, most demigods either make
their way here, or they get killed off. A few manage to survive in the outside world and become
famous. Believe me, if I told you the names, you’d know them. Some don’t even realize they’re
demigods. But very, very few are like that.”
“So monsters can’t get in here?”

Annabeth shook her head. “Not unless they’re intentionally stocked in the woods or specially
summoned by somebody on the inside.”
“Why would anybody want to summon a monster?”
“Practice fights. Practical jokes.”
“Practical jokes?”
“The point is, the borders are sealed to keep mortals and monsters out. From the outside, mortals
look into the valley and see nothing unusual, just a strawberry farm.”
“So … you’re a year-rounder?”
Annabeth nodded. From under the collar of her T-shirt she pulled a leather necklace with five
clay beads of different colors. It was just like Luke’s, except Annabeth’s also had a big gold ring
strung on it, like a college ring.
“I’ve been here since I was seven,” she said. “Every August, on the last day of summer session,
you get a bead for surviving another year. I’ve been here longer than most of the counselors, and
they’re all in college.”
“Why did you come so young?”
She twisted the ring on her necklace. “None of your business.”
“Oh.” I stood there for a minute in uncomfortable silence. “So … I could just walk out of here
right now if I wanted to?”
“It would be suicide, but you could, with Mr. D’s or Chiron’s permission. But they wouldn’t give
permission until the end of the summer session unless …”
“Unless?”
“You were granted a quest. But that hardly ever happens. The last time …”
Her voice trailed off. I could tell from her tone that the last time hadn’t gone well.
“Back in the sick room,” I said, “when you were feeding me that stuff-“
“Ambrosia.”
“Yeah. You asked me something about the summer solstice.”
Annabeth’s shoulders tensed. “So you do know something?”
“Well… no. Back at my old school, I overheard Grover and Chiron talking about it. Grover
mentioned the summer solstice. He said something like we didn’t have much time, because of the
deadline. What did that mean?”
She clenched her fists. “I wish I knew. Chiron and the satyrs, they know, but they won’t tell me.
Something is wrong in Olympus, something pretty major. Last time I was there, everything seemed so
normal.”
“You’ve been to Olympus?”
“Some of us year-rounders-Luke and Clarisse and I and a few others-we took a field trip during
winter solstice. That’s when the gods have their big annual council.”
“But… how did you get there?”
“The Long Island Railroad, of course. You get off at Penn Station. Empire State Building, special
elevator to the six hundredth floor.” She looked at me like she was sure I must know this already.
“You are a New Yorker, right?”
“Oh, sure.” As far as I knew, there were only a hundred and two floors in the Empire State
Building, but I decided not to point that out.
“Right after we visited,” Annabeth continued, “the weather got weird, as if the gods had started
fighting. A couple of times since, I’ve overheard satyrs talking. The best I can figure out is that
something important was stolen. And if it isn’t returned by summer solstice, there’s going to be

“Clarisse, from Ares, was joking about me being ‘Big Three’ material. Then Annabeth … twice, she
said I might be ‘the one.’ She said I should talk to the Oracle. What was that all about?”
Luke folded his knife. “I hate prophecies.”
“What do you mean?”
His face twitched around the scar. “Let’s just say I messed things up for everybody else. The last
two years, ever since my trip to the Garden of the Hesperides went sour, Chiron hasn’t allowed any
more quests. Annabeth’s been dying to get out into the world. She pestered Chiron so much he finally
told her he already knew her fate. He’d had a prophecy from the Oracle. He wouldn’t tell her the
whole thing, but he said Annabeth wasn’t destined to go on a quest yet. She had to wait until…
somebody special came to the camp.”
“Somebody special?”
“Don’t worry about it, kid,” Luke said. “Annabeth wants to think every new camper who comes
through here is the omen she’s been waiting for. Now, come on, it’s dinnertime.”
The moment he said it, a horn blew in the distance. Somehow, I knew it was a conch shell, even
though I’d never heard one before.
Luke yelled, “Eleven, fall in!”
The whole cabin, about twenty of us, filed into the commons yard. We lined up in order of
seniority, so of course I was dead last. Campers came from the other cabins, too, except for the three
empty cabins at the end, and cabin eight, which had looked normal in the daytime, but was now
starting to glow silver as the sun went down.
We marched up the hill to the mess hall pavilion. Satyrs joined us from the meadow. Naiads
emerged from the canoeing lake. A few other girls came out of the woods- and when I say out of the
woods, I mean straight out of the woods. I saw one girl, about nine or ten years old, melt from the
side of a maple tree and come skipping up the hill.
In all, there were maybe a hundred campers, a few dozen satyrs, and a dozen assorted wood
nymphs and naiads.
At the pavilion, torches blazed around the marble columns. A central fire burned in a bronze
brazier the size of a bathtub. Each cabin had its own table, covered in white cloth trimmed in purple.
Four of the tables were empty, but cabin eleven’s was way overcrowded. I had to squeeze on to the
edge of a bench with half my butt hanging off.
I saw Grover sitting at table twelve with Mr. D, a few satyrs, and a couple of plump blond boys
who looked just like Mr. D. Chiron stood to one side, the picnic table being way too small for a
centaur.
Annabeth sat at table six with a bunch of serious-looking athletic kids, all with her gray eyes and
honey-blond hair.
Clarisse sat behind me at Ares’s table. She’d apparently gotten over being hosed down, because
she was laughing and belching right alongside her friends.
Finally, Chiron pounded his hoof against the marble floor of the pavilion, and everybody fell
silent. He raised a glass. “To the gods!”
Everybody else raised their glasses. “To the gods!”
Wood nymphs came forward with platters of food: grapes, apples, strawberries, cheese, fresh
bread, and yes, barbecue! My glass was empty, but Luke said, “Speak to it. Whatever you wantnonalcoholic, of course.”
I said, “Cherry Coke.”
The glass filled with sparkling caramel liquid.

Then I had an idea. “Blue Cherry Coke.”
The soda turned a violent shade of cobalt.
I took a cautious sip. Perfect.
I drank a toast to my mother.
She’s not gone, I told myself. Not permanently, anyway. She’s in the Underworld. And if that’s a
real place, then someday…
“Here you go, Percy,” Luke said, handing me a platter of smoked brisket.
I loaded my plate and was about to take a big bite when I noticed everybody getting up, carrying
their plates toward the fire in the center of the pavilion. I wondered if they were going for dessert or
something.
“Come on,” Luke told me.
As I got closer, I saw that everyone was taking a portion of their meal and dropping it into the
fire, the ripest strawberry, the juiciest slice of beef, the warmest, most buttery roll.
Luke murmured in my ear, “Burnt offerings for the gods. They like the smell.”
“You’re kidding.”
His look warned me not to take this lightly, but I couldn’t help wondering why an immortal, allpowerful being would like the smell of burning food.
Luke approached the fire, bowed his head, and tossed in a cluster of fat red grapes. “Hermes.”
I was next.
I wished I knew what god’s name to say.
Finally, I made a silent plea. Whoever you are, tell me. Please.
I scraped a big slice of brisket into the flames.
When I caught a whiff of the smoke, I didn’t gag.
It smelled nothing like burning food. It smelled of hot chocolate and fresh-baked brownies,
hamburgers on the grill and wildflowers, and a hundred other good things that shouldn’t have gone
well together, but did. I could almost believe the gods could live off that smoke.
When everybody had returned to their seats and finished eating their meals, Chiron pounded his
hoof again for our attention.
Mr. D got up with a huge sigh. “Yes, I suppose I’d better say hello to all you brats. Well, hello.
Our activities director, Chiron, says the next capture the flag is Friday. Cabin five presently holds the
laurels.”
A bunch of ugly cheering rose from the Ares table.
“Personally,” Mr. D continued, “I couldn’t care less, but congratulations. Also, I should tell you
that we have a new camper today. Peter Johnson.”
Chiron murmured something.
“Er, Percy Jackson,” Mr. D corrected. “That’s right. Hurrah, and all that. Now run along to your
silly campfire. Go on.”
Everybody cheered. We all headed down toward the amphitheater, where Apollo’s cabin led a
sing-along. We sang camp songs about the gods and ate s’mores and joked around, and the funny thing
was, I didn’t feel that anyone was staring at me anymore. I felt that I was home.
Later in the evening, when the sparks from the campfire were curling into a starry sky, the conch
horn blew again, and we all filed back to our cabins. I didn’t realize how exhausted I was until I
collapsed on my borrowed sleeping bag.
My fingers curled around the Minotaur’s horn. I thought about my mom, but I had good thoughts:
her smile, the bedtime stories she would read me when I was a kid, the way she would tell me not to

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
8 WE CAPTURE
A FLAG
The next few days I settled into a routine that felt almost normal, if you don’t count the fact that I
was getting lessons from satyrs, nymphs, and a centaur.
Each morning I took Ancient Greek from Annabeth, and we talked about the gods and goddesses
in the present tense, which was kind of weird. I discovered Annabeth was right about my dyslexia:
Ancient Greek wasn’t that hard for me to read. At least, no harder than English. After a couple of
mornings, I could stumble through a few lines of Homer without too much headache.
The rest of the day, I’d rotate through outdoor activities, looking for something I was good at.
Chiron tried to teach me archery, but we found out pretty quick I wasn’t any good with a bow and
arrow. He didn’t complain, even when he had to desnag a stray arrow out of his tail.
Foot racing? No good either. The wood-nymph instructors left me in the dust. They told me not to
worry about it. They’d had centuries of practice running away from lovesick gods. But still, it was a
little humiliating to be slower than a tree.
And wrestling? Forget it. Every time I got on the mat, Clarisse would pulverize me.
“There’s more where that came from, punk,” she’d mumble in my ear.
The only thing I really excelled at was canoeing, and that wasn’t the kind of heroic skill people
expected to see from the kid who had beaten the Minotaur.
I knew the senior campers and counselors were watching me, trying to decide who my dad was,
but they weren’t having an easy time of it. I wasn’t as strong as the Ares kids, or as good at archery as
the Apollo kids. I didn’t have Hephaestus’s skill with metalwork or-gods forbid- Dionysus’s way
with vine plants. Luke told me I might be a child of Hermes, a kind of jack-of-all-trades, master of
none. But I got the feeling he was just trying to make me feel better. He really didn’t know what to
make of me either.
Despite all that, I liked camp. I got used to the morning fog over the beach, the smell of hot
strawberry fields in the afternoon, even the weird noises of monsters in the woods at night. I would
eat dinner with cabin eleven, scrape part of my meal into the fire, and try to feel some connection to
my real dad. Nothing came. Just that warm feeling I’d always had, like the memory of his smile. I
tried not to think too much about my mom, but I kept wondering: if gods and monsters were real, if all
this magical stuff was possible, surely there was some way to save her, to bring her back….
I started to understand Luke’s bitterness and how he seemed to resent his father, Hermes. So okay,
maybe gods had important things to do. But couldn’t they call once in a while, or thunder, or
something? Dionysus could make Diet Coke appear out of thin air. Why couldn’t my dad, whoever he
was, make a phone appear?
Thursday afternoon, three days after I’d arrived at Camp Half-Blood, I had my first swordfighting lesson. Everybody from cabin eleven gathered in the big circular arena, where Luke would be
our instructor.
We started with basic stabbing and slashing, using some straw-stuffed dummies in Greek armor. I
guess I did okay. At least, I understood what I was supposed to do and my reflexes were good.
The problem was, I couldn’t find a blade that felt right in my hands. Either they were too heavy,

weapon skidding across the floor.
After a long pause, somebody in the audience said, “Beginner’s luck?”
Luke wiped the sweat off his brow. He appraised at me with an entirely new interest. “Maybe,”
he said. “But I wonder what Percy could do with a balanced sword… .”
Friday afternoon, I was sitting with Grover at the lake, resting from a near-death experience on
the climbing wall. Grover had scampered to the top like a mountain goat, but the lava had almost
gotten me. My shirt had smoking holes in it. The hairs had been singed off my forearms.
We sat on the pier, watching the naiads do underwater basket-weaving, until I got up the nerve to
ask Grover how his conversation had gone with Mr. D.
His face turned a sickly shade of yellow.
“Fine,” he said. “Just great.”
“So your career’s still on track?”
He glanced at me nervously. “Chiron t-told you I want a searcher’s license?”
“Well… no.” I had no idea what a searcher’s license was, but it didn’t seem like the right time to
ask. “He just said you had big plans, you know … and that you needed credit for completing a
keeper’s assignment. So did you get it?”
Grover looked down at the naiads. “Mr. D suspended judgment. He said I hadn’t failed or
succeeded with you yet, so our fates were still tied together. If you got a quest and I went along to
protect you, and we both came back alive, then maybe he’d consider the job complete.”
My spirits lifted. “Well, that’s not so bad, right?”
“Blaa-ha-ha! He might as well have transferred me to stable-cleaning duty. The chances of you
getting a quest… and even if you did, why would you want me along?”
“Of course I’d want you along!”
Grover stared glumly into the water. “Basket-weaving … Must be nice to have a useful skill.”
I tried to reassure him that he had lots of talents, but that just made him look more miserable. We
talked about canoeing and swordplay for a while, then debated the pros and cons of the different
gods. Finally, I asked him about the four empty cabins.
“Number eight, the silver one, belongs to Artemis,” he said. “She vowed to be a maiden forever.
So of course, no kids. The cabin is, you know, honorary. If she didn’t have one, she’d be mad.”
“Yeah, okay. But the other three, the ones at the end. Are those the Big Three?”
Grover tensed. We were getting close to a touchy subject. “No. One of them, number two, is
Hera’s,” he said. “That’s another honorary thing. She’s the goddess of marriage, so of course she
wouldn’t go around having affairs with mortals. That’s her husband’s job. When we say the Big
Three, we mean the three powerful brothers, the sons of Kronos.”
“Zeus, Poseidon, Hades.”
“Right. You know. After the great battle with the Titans, they took over the world from their dad
and drew lots to decide who got what.”
“Zeus got the sky,” I remembered. “Poseidon the sea, Hades the Underworld.”
“Uh-huh.”
“But Hades doesn’t have a cabin here.”
“No. He doesn’t have a throne on Olympus, either. He sort of does his own thing down in the
Underworld. If he did have a cabin here …” Grover shuddered. “Well, it wouldn’t be pleasant. Let’s
leave it at that.”
“But Zeus and Poseidon-they both had, like, a bazillion kids in the myths. Why are their cabins
empty?”

Grover shifted his hooves uncomfortably. “About sixty years ago, after World War II, the Big
Three agreed they wouldn’t sire any more heroes. Their children were just too powerful. They were
affecting the course of human events too much, causing too much carnage. World War II, you know,
that was basically a fight between the sons of Zeus and Poseidon on one side, and the sons of Hades
on the other. The winning side, Zeus and Poseidon, made Hades swear an oath with them: no more
affairs with mortal women. They all swore on the River Styx.”
Thunder boomed.
I said, “That’s the most serious oath you can make.”
Grover nodded.
“And the brothers kept their word-no kids?”
Grover’s face darkened. “Seventeen years ago, Zeus fell off the wagon. There was this TV starlet
with a big fluffy eighties hairdo-he just couldn’t help himself. When their child was born, a little girl
named Thalia .. . well, the River Styx is serious about promises. Zeus himself got off easy because
he’s immortal, but he brought a terrible fate on his daughter.”
“But that isn’t fair.’ It wasn’t the little girl’s fault.”
Grover hesitated. “Percy, children of the Big Three have powers greater than other half-bloods.
They have a strong aura, a scent that attracts monsters. When Hades found out about the girl, he
wasn’t too happy about Zeus breaking his oath. Hades let the worst monsters out of Tartarus to
torment Thalia. A satyr was assigned to be her keeper when she was twelve, but there was nothing he
could do. He tried to escort her here with a couple of other half-bloods she’d befriended. They
almost made it. They got all the way to the top of that hill.”
He pointed across the valley, to the pine tree where I’d fought the minotaur. “All three Kindly
Ones were after them, along with a horde of hellhounds. They were about to be overrun when Thalia
told her satyr to take the other two half-bloods to safety while she held off the monsters. She was
wounded and tired, and she didn’t want to live like a hunted animal. The satyr didn’t want to leave
her, but he couldn’t change her mind, and he had to protect the others. So Thalia made her final stand
alone, at the top of that hill. As she died, Zeus took pity on her. He turned her into that pine tree. Her
spirit still helps protect the borders of the valley. That’s why the hill is called Half-Blood Hill.”
I stared at the pine in the distance.
The story made me feel hollow, and guilty too. A girl my age had sacrificed herself to save her
friends. She had faced a whole army of monsters. Next to that, my victory over the Minotaur didn’t
seem like much. I wondered, if I’d acted differently, could I have saved my mother?
“Grover,” I said, “have heroes really gone on quests to the Underworld?”
“Sometimes,” he said. “Orpheus. Hercules. Houdini.”
“And have they ever returned somebody from the dead?”
“No. Never. Orpheus came close… . Percy, you’re not seriously thinking-“
“No,” I lied. “I was just wondering. So … a satyr is always assigned to guard a demigod?”
Grover studied me warily. I hadn’t persuaded him that I’d really dropped the Underworld idea.
“Not always. We go undercover to a lot of schools. We try to sniff out the half-bloods who have the
makings of great heroes. If we find one with a very strong aura, like a child of the Big Three, we alert
Chiron. He tries to keep an eye on them, since they could cause really huge problems.”
“And you found me. Chiron said you thought I might be something special.”
Grover looked as if I’d just led him into a trap. “I didn’t… Oh, listen, don’t think like that. If you
were-you know-you’d never ever be allowed a quest, and I’d never get my license. You’re probably
a child of Hermes. Or maybe even one of the minor gods, like Nemesis, the god of revenge. Don’t

worry, okay?”
I got the idea he was reassuring himself more than me.
That night after dinner, there was a lot more excitement than usual.
At last, it was time for capture the flag.
When the plates were cleared away, the conch horn sounded and we all stood at our tables.
Campers yelled and cheered as Annabeth and two of her siblings ran into the pavilion carrying a
silk banner. It was about ten feet long, glistening gray, with a painting of a barn owl above an olive
tree. From the opposite side of the pavilion, Clarisse and her buddies ran in with another banner, of
identical size, but gaudy red, painted with a bloody spear and a boar’s head.
I turned to Luke and yelled over the noise, “Those are the flags?”
“Yeah.”
“Ares and Athena always lead the teams?”
“Not always,” he said. “But often.”
“So, if another cabin captures one, what do you do- repaint the flag?”
He grinned. “You’ll see. First we have to get one.”
“Whose side are we on?”
He gave me a sly look, as if he knew something I didn’t. The scar on his face made him look
almost evil in the torchlight. “We’ve made a temporary alliance with Athena. Tonight, we get the flag
from Ares. And you are going to help.”
The teams were announced. Athena had made an alliance with Apollo and Hermes, the two
biggest cabins. Apparently, privileges had been traded-shower times, chore schedules, the best slots
for activities-in order to win support.
Ares had allied themselves with everybody else: Dionysus, Demeter, Aphrodite, and Hephaestus.
From what I’d seen, Dionysus’s kids were actually good athletes, but there were only two of them.
Demeter’s kids had the edge with nature skills and outdoor stuff but they weren’t very aggressive.
Aphrodite’s sons and daughters I wasn’t too worried about. They mostly sat out every activity and
checked their reflections in the lake and did their hair and gossiped. Hephaestus’s kids weren’t pretty,
and there were only four of them, but they were big and burly from working in the metal shop all day.
They might be a problem. That, of course, left Ares’s cabin: a dozen of the biggest, ugliest, meanest
kids on Long Island, or anywhere else on the planet.
Chiron hammered his hoof on the marble.
“Heroes!” he announced. “You know the rules. The creek is the boundary line. The entire forest is
fair game. All magic items are allowed. The banner must be prominently displayed, and have no more
than two guards. Prisoners may be disarmed, but may not be bound or gagged. No killing or maiming
is allowed. I will serve as referee and battlefield medic. Arm yourselves!”
He spread his hands, and the tables were suddenly covered with equipment: helmets, bronze
swords, spears, oxhide shields coated in metal.
“Whoa,” I said. “We’re really supposed to use these?”
Luke looked at me as if I were crazy. “Unless you want to get skewered by your friends in cabin
five. Here-Chiron thought these would fit. You’ll be on border patrol.”
My shield was the size of an NBA backboard, with a big caduceus in the middle. It weighed about
a million pounds. I could have snowboarded on it fine, but I hoped nobody seriously expected me to
run fast. My helmet, like all the helmets on Athena’s side, had a blue horsehair plume on top. Ares
and their allies had red plumes.
Annabeth yelled, “Blue team, forward!”

sparks flew. Now both my arms felt numb.
“Oh, wow,” Clarisse said. “I’m scared of this guy. Really scared.”
“The flag is that way,” I told her. I wanted to sound angry, but I was afraid it didn’t come out that
way.
“Yeah,” one of her siblings said. “But see, we don’t care about the flag. We care about a guy who
made our cabin look stupid.”
“You do that without my help,” I told them. It probably wasn’t the smartest thing to say.
Two of them came at me. I backed up toward the creek, tried to raise my shield, but Clarisse was
too fast. Her spear stuck me straight in the ribs. If I hadn’t been wearing an armored breastplate, I
would’ve been shish-ke-babbed. As it was, the electric point just about shocked my teeth out of my
mouth. One of her cabinmates slashed his sword across my arm, leaving a good-size cut.
Seeing my own blood made me dizzy-warm and cold at the same time.
“No maiming,” I managed to say.
“Oops,” the guy said. “Guess I lost my dessert privilege.
He pushed me into the creek and I landed with a splash. They all laughed. I figured as soon as
they were through being amused, I would die. But then something happened. The water seemed to
wake up my senses, as if I’d just had a bag of my mom’s double-espresso jelly beans.
Clarisse and her cabinmates came into the creek to get me, but I stood to meet them. I knew what
to do. I swung the flat of my sword against the first guy’s head and knocked his helmet clean off. I hit
him so hard I could see his eyes vibrating as he crumpled into the water.
Ugly Number Two and Ugly Number Three came at me. I slammed one in the face with my shield
and used my sword to shear off the other guy’s horsehair plume. Both of them backed up quick. Ugly
Number Four didn’t look really anxious to attack, but Clarisse kept coming, the point of her spear
crackling with energy. As soon as she thrust, I caught the shaft between the edge of my shield and my
sword, and I snapped it like a twig.
“Ah!” she screamed. “You idiot! You corpse-breath worm!”
She probably would’ve said worse, but I smacked her between the eyes with my sword-butt and
sent her stumbling backward out of the creek.
Then I heard yelling, elated screams, and I saw Luke racing toward the boundary line with the red
team’s banner lifted high. He was flanked by a couple of Hermes guys covering his retreat, and a few
Apollos behind them, fighting off the Hephaestus kids. The Ares folks got up, and Clarisse muttered a
dazed curse.
“A trick!” she shouted. “It was a trick.”
They staggered after Luke, but it was too late. Everybody converged on the creek as Luke ran
across into friendly territory. Our side exploded into cheers. The red banner shimmered and turned to
silver. The boar and spear were replaced with a huge caduceus, the symbol of cabin eleven.
Everybody on the blue team picked up Luke and started carrying him around on their shoulders.
Chiron cantered out from the woods and blew the conch horn.
The game was over. We’d won.
I was about to join the celebration when Annabeth’s voice, right next to me in the creek, said,
“Not bad, hero.”
I looked, but she wasn’t there.
“Where the heck did you learn to fight like that?” she asked. The air shimmered, and she
materialized, holding a Yankees baseball cap as if she’d just taken it off her head.
I felt myself getting angry. I wasn’t even fazed by the fact that she’d just been invisible. “You set

me up,” I said. “You put me here because you knew Clarisse would come after me, while you sent
Luke around the flank. You had it all figured out.”
Annabeth shrugged. “I told you. Athena always, always has a plan.”
“A plan to get me pulverized.”
“I came as fast as I could. I was about to jump in, but …” She shrugged. “You didn’t need help.”
Then she noticed my wounded arm. “How did you do that?”
“Sword cut,” I said. “What do you think?”
“No. It was a sword cut. Look at it.”
The blood was gone. Where the huge cut had been, there was a long white scratch, and even that
was fading. As I watched, it turned into a small scar, and disappeared.
“I-I don’t get it,” I said.
Annabeth was thinking hard. I could almost see the gears turning. She looked down at my feet,
then at Clarisse’s broken spear, and said, “Step out of the water, Percy.”
“What-“
“Just do it.”
I came out of the creek and immediately felt bone tired. My arms started to go numb again. My
adrenaline rush left me. I almost fell over, but Annabeth steadied me.
“Oh, Styx,” she cursed. “This is not good. I didn’t want … I assumed it would be Zeus… .”
Before I could ask what she meant, I heard that canine growl again, but much closer than before.
A howl ripped through the forest.
The campers’ cheering died instantly. Chiron shouted something in Ancient Greek, which I would
realize, only later, I had understood perfectly: “Stand ready! My bow!”
Annabeth drew her sword.
There on the rocks just above us was a black hound the size of a rhino, with lava-red eyes and
fangs like daggers.
It was looking straight at me.
Nobody moved except Annabeth, who yelled, “Percy, run!”
She tried to step in front of me, but the hound was too fast. It leaped over her-an enormous
shadow with teeth-and just as it hit me, as I stumbled backward and felt its razor-sharp claws ripping
through my armor, there was a cascade of thwacking sounds, like forty pieces of paper being ripped
one after the other. From the hounds neck sprouted a cluster of arrows. The monster fell dead at my
feet.
By some miracle, I was still alive. I didn’t want to look underneath the ruins of my shredded
armor. My chest felt warm and wet, and I knew I was badly cut. Another second, and the monster
would’ve turned me into a hundred pounds of delicatessen meat.
Chiron trotted up next to us, a bow in his hand, his face grim.
“Di immortales!” Annabeth said. “That’s a hellhound from the Fields of Punishment. They don’t
… they’re not supposed to …”
“Someone summoned it,” Chiron said. “Someone inside the camp.”
Luke came over, the banner in his hand forgotten, his moment of glory gone.
Clarisse yelled, “It’s all Percy’s fault! Percy summoned it!”
“Be quiet, child,” Chiron told her.
We watched the body of the hellhound melt into shadow, soaking into the ground until it
disappeared.
“You’re wounded,” Annabeth told me. “Quick, Percy, get in the water.”

“I’m okay.”
“No, you’re not,” she said. “Chiron, watch this.”
I was too tired to argue. I stepped back into the creek, the whole camp gathering around me.
Instantly, I felt better. I could feel the cuts on my chest closing up. Some of the campers gasped.
“Look, I-I don’t know why,” I said, trying to apologize. “I’m sorry….”
But they weren’t watching my wounds heal. They were staring at something above my head.
“Percy,” Annabeth said, pointing. “Um …”
By the time I looked up, the sign was already fading, but I could still make out the hologram of
green light, spinning and gleaming. A three-tipped spear: a trident.
“Your father,” Annabeth murmured. “This is really not good.”
“It is determined,” Chiron announced.
All around me, campers started kneeling, even the Ares cabin, though they didn’t look happy
about it.
“My father?” I asked, completely bewildered.
“Poseidon,” said Chiron. “Earthshaker, Stormbringer, Father of Horses. Hail, Perseus Jackson,
Son of the Sea God.”

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
9 I AM OFFERED
A QUEST
The next morning, Chiron moved me to cabin three.
I didn’t have to share with anybody. I had plenty of room for all my stuff: the Minotaur’s horn, one
set of spare clothes, and a toiletry bag. I got to sit at my own dinner table, pick all my own activities,
call “lights out” whenever I felt like it, and not listen to anybody else.
And I was absolutely miserable.
Just when I’d started to feel accepted, to feel I had a home in cabin eleven and I might be a normal
kid-or as normal as you can be when you’re a half-blood-I’d been separated out as if I had some rare
disease.
Nobody mentioned the hellhound, but I got the feeling they were all talking about it behind my
back. The attack had scared everybody. It sent two messages: one, that I was the son of the Sea God;
and two, monsters would stop at nothing to kill me. They could even invade a camp that had always
been considered safe.
The other campers steered clear of me as much as possible. Cabin eleven was too nervous to
have sword class with me after what I’d done to the Ares folks in the woods, so my lessons with Luke
became one-on-one. He pushed me harder than ever, and wasn’t afraid to bruise me up in the process.
“You’re going to need all the training you can get,” he promised, as we were working with
swords and flaming torches. “Now let’s try that viper-beheading strike again. Fifty more repetitions.”
Annabeth still taught me Greek in the mornings, but she seemed distracted. Every time I said
something, she scowled at me, as if I’d just poked her between the eyes.
After lessons, she would walk away muttering to herself: “Quest … Poseidon? … Dirty rotten …
Got to make a plan …”
Even Clarisse kept her distance, though her venomous looks made it clear she wanted to kill me
for breaking her magic spear. I wished she would just yell or punch me or something. I’d rather get
into fights every day than be ignored.
I knew somebody at camp resented me, because one night I came into my cabin and found a mortal
newspaper dropped inside the doorway, a copy of the New York Daily News, opened to the Metro
page. The article took me almost an hour to read, because the angrier I got, the more the words floated
around on the page.
BOY AND MOTHER STILL MISSING AFTER
FREAK CAR ACCIDENT
BY EILEEN SMYTHE
Sally Jackson and son Percy are still missing one week after their mysterious disappearance. The
family’s badly burned ‘78 Camaro was discovered last Saturday on a north Long Island road with the
roof ripped off and the front axle broken. The car had flipped and skidded for several hundred feet
before exploding.
Mother and son had gone for a weekend vacation to Montauk, but left hastily, under mysterious
circumstances. Small traces of blood were found in the car and near the scene of the wreck, but there
were no other signs of the missing Jacksons. Residents in the rural area reported seeing nothing

I pointed at the storm. “What the heck is that, then?”
He glanced uneasily at the sky. “It’ll pass around us. Bad weather always does.”
I realized he was right. In the week I’d been here, it had never even been overcast. The few rain
clouds I’d seen had skirted right around the edges of the valley.
But this storm … this one was huge.
At the volleyball pit, the kids from Apollo’s cabin were playing a morning game against the
satyrs. Dionysus’s twins were walking around in the strawberry fields, making the plants grow.
Everybody was going about their normal business, but they looked tense. They kept their eyes on the
storm.
Grover and I walked up to the front porch of the Big House. Dionysus sat at the pinochle table in
his tiger-striped Hawaiian shirt with his Diet Coke, just as he had on my first day. Chiron sat across
the table in his fake wheelchair. They were playing against invisible opponents–two sets of cards
hovering in the air.
“Well, well,” Mr. D said without looking up. “Our little celebrity.”
I waited.
“Come closer,” Mr. D said. “And don’t expect me to kowtow to you, mortal, just because old
Barnacle-Beard is your father.”
A net of lightning flashed across the clouds. Thunder shook the windows of the house.
“Blah, blah, blah,” Dionysus said.
Chiron feigned interest in his pinochle cards. Grover cowered by the railing, his hooves clopping
back and forth.
“If I had my way,” Dionysus said, “I would cause your molecules to erupt in flames. We’d sweep
up the ashes and be done with a lot of trouble. But Chiron seems to feel this would be against my
mission at this cursed camp: to keep you little brats safe from harm.”
“Spontaneous combustion is a form of harm, Mr. D,” Chiron put in.
“Nonsense,” Dionysus said. “Boy wouldn’t feel a thing. Nevertheless, I’ve agreed to restrain
myself I’m thinking of turning you into a dolphin instead, sending you back to your father.”
“Mr. D-” Chiron warned.
“Oh, all right,” Dionysus relented. “There’s one more option. But it’s deadly foolishness.”
Dionysus rose, and the invisible players’ cards dropped to the table. “I’m off to Olympus for the
emergency meeting. If the boy is still here when I get back, I’ll turn him into an Atlantic bottlenose.
Do you understand? And Perseus Jackson, if you’re at all smart, you’ll see that’s a much more
sensible choice than what Chiron feels you must do.”
Dionysus picked up a playing card, twisted it, and it became a plastic rectangle. A credit card?
No. A security pass.
He snapped his fingers.
The air seemed to fold and bend around him. He became a hologram, then a wind, then he was
gone, leaving only the smell of fresh-pressed grapes lingering behind.
Chiron smiled at me, but he looked tired and strained. “Sit, Percy, please. And Grover.”
We did.
Chiron laid his cards on the table, a winning hand he hadn’t gotten to use.
“Tell me, Percy,” he said. “What did you make of the hellhound?”
Just hearing the name made me shudder.
Chiron probably wanted me to say, Heck, it was nothing. I eat hellhounds for breakfast. But I
didn’t feel like lying.

“It scared me,” I said. “If you hadn’t shot it, I’d be dead.”
“You’ll meet worse, Percy. Far worse, before you’re done.”
“Done … with what?”
“Your quest, of course. Will you accept it?”
I glanced at Grover, who was crossing his fingers.
“Um, sir,” I said, “you haven’t told me what it is yet.”
Chiron grimaced. “Well, that’s the hard part, the details.”
Thunder rumbled across the valley. The storm clouds had now reached the edge of the beach. As
far as I could see, the sky and the sea were boiling together.
“Poseidon and Zeus,” I said. “They’re fighting over something valuable … something that was
stolen, aren’t they?”
Chiron and Grover exchanged looks.
Chiron sat forward in his wheelchair. “How did you know that?”
My face felt hot. I wished I hadn’t opened my big mouth. “The weather since Christmas has been
weird, like the sea and the sky are fighting. Then I talked to Annabeth, and she’d overheard something
about a theft. And … I’ve also been having these dreams.”
“I knew it,” Grover said.
“Hush, satyr,” Chiron ordered.
“But it is his quest!” Grover’s eyes were bright with excitement. “It must be!”
“Only the Oracle can determine.” Chiron stroked his bristly beard. “Nevertheless, Percy, you are
correct. Your father and Zeus are having their worst quarrel in centuries. They are fighting over
something valuable that was stolen. To be precise: a lightning bolt.”
I laughed nervously. “A what?”
“Do not take this lightly,” Chiron warned. “I’m not talking about some tinfoil-covered zigzag
you’d see in a second-grade play. I’m talking about a two-foot-long cylinder of high-grade celestial
bronze, capped on both ends with god-level explosives.”
“Oh.”
“Zeus’s master bolt,” Chiron said, getting worked up now. “The symbol of his power, from which
all other lightning bolts are patterned. The first weapon made by the Cyclopes for the war against the
Titans, the bolt that sheered the top off Mount Etna and hurled Kronos from his throne; the master bolt,
which packs enough power to make mortal hydrogen bombs look like firecrackers.”
“And it’s missing?”
“Stolen,” Chiron said.
“By who?”
“By whom,” Chiron corrected. Once a teacher, always a teacher. “By you.”
My mouth fell open.
“At least”-Chiron held up a hand-“that’s what Zeus thinks. During the winter solstice, at the last
council of the gods, Zeus and Poseidon had an argument. The usual nonsense: ‘Mother Rhea always
liked you best,’ Air disasters are more spectacular than sea disasters,’ et cetera. Afterward, Zeus
realized his master bolt was missing, taken from the throne room under his very nose. He immediately
blamed Poseidon. Now, a god cannot usurp another god’s symbol of power directly-that is forbidden
by the most ancient of divine laws. But Zeus believes your father convinced a human hero to take it.”
“But I didn’t-“
“Patience and listen, child,” Chiron said. “Zeus has good reason to be suspicious. The forges of
the Cyclopes are under the ocean, which gives Poseidon some influence over the makers of his

brother’s lightning. Zeus believes Poseidon has taken the master bolt, and is now secretly having the
Cyclopes build an arsenal of illegal copies, which might be used to topple Zeus from his throne. The
only thing Zeus wasn’t sure about was which hero Poseidon used to steal the bolt. Now Poseidon has
openly claimed you as his son. You were in New York over the winter holidays. You could easily
have snuck into Olympus. Zeus believes he has found his thief.”
“But I’ve never even been to Olympus! Zeus is crazy!”
Chiron and Grover glanced nervously at the sky. The clouds didn’t seem to be parting around us,
as Grover had promised. They were rolling straight over our valley, sealing us in like a coffin lid.
“Er, Percy …?” Grover said. “We don’t use the c-word to describe the Lord of the Sky.”
“Perhaps paranoid,” Chiron suggested. “Then again, Poseidon has tried to unseat Zeus before. I
believe that was question thirty-eight on your final exam….” He looked at me as if he actually
expected me to remember question thirty-eight.
How could anyone accuse me of stealing a god’s weapon? I couldn’t even steal a slice of pizza
from Gabe’s poker party without getting busted. Chiron was waiting for an answer.
“Something about a golden net?” I guessed. “Poseidon and Hera and a few other gods … they,
like, trapped Zeus and wouldn’t let him out until he promised to be a better ruler, right?”
“Correct,” Chiron said. “And Zeus has never trusted Poseidon since. Of course, Poseidon denies
stealing the master bolt. He took great offense at the accusation. The two have been arguing back and
forth for months, threatening war. And now, you’ve come along-the proverbial last straw.”
“But I’m just a kid!”
“Percy,” Grover cut in, “if you were Zeus, and you already thought your brother was plotting to
overthrow you, then your brother suddenly admitted he had broken the sacred oath he took after
World War II, that he’s fathered a new mortal hero who might be used as a weapon against you….
Wouldn’t that put a twist in your toga?”
“But I didn’t do anything. Poseidon-my dad-he didn’t really have this master bolt stolen, did he?”
Chiron sighed. “Most thinking observers would agree that thievery is not Poseidon’s style. But the
Sea God is too proud to try convincing Zeus of that. Zeus has demanded that Poseidon return the bolt
by the summer solstice. That’s June twenty-first, ten days from now. Poseidon wants an apology for
being called a thief by the same date. I hoped that diplomacy might prevail, that Hera or Demeter or
Hestia would make the two brothers see sense. But your arrival has inflamed Zeus’s temper. Now
neither god will back down. Unless someone intervenes, unless the master bolt is found and returned
to Zeus before the solstice, there will be war. And do you know what a full-fledged war would look
like, Percy?”
“Bad?” I guessed.
“Imagine the world in chaos. Nature at war with itself. Olympians forced to choose sides between
Zeus and Poseidon. Destruction. Carnage. Millions dead. Western civilization turned into a
battleground so big it will make the Trojan War look like a water-balloon fight.”
“Bad,” I repeated.
“And you, Percy Jackson, would be the first to feel Zeus’s wrath.”
It started to rain. Volleyball players stopped their game and stared in stunned silence at the sky.
I had brought this storm to Half-Blood Hill. Zeus was punishing the whole camp because of me. I
was furious.
“So I have to find the stupid bolt,” I said. “And return it to Zeus.”
“What better peace offering,” Chiron said, “than to have the son of Poseidon return Zeus’s
property?”

“If Poseidon doesn’t have it, where is the thing?”
“I believe I know.” Chiron’s expression was grim. “Part of a prophecy I had years ago … well,
some of the lines make sense to me, now. But before I can say more, you must officially take up the
quest. You must seek the counsel of the Oracle.”
“Why can’t you tell me where the bolt is beforehand?”
“Because if I did, you would be too afraid to accept the challenge.”
I swallowed. “Good reason.”
“You agree then?”
I looked at Grover, who nodded encouragingly.
Easy for him. I was the one Zeus wanted to kill.
“All right,” I said. “It’s better than being turned into a dolphin.”
“Then it’s time you consulted the Oracle,” Chiron said. “Go upstairs, Percy Jackson, to the attic.
When you come back down, assuming you’re still sane, we will talk more.”
Four flights up, the stairs ended under a green trapdoor.
I pulled the cord. The door swung down, and a wooden ladder clattered into place.
The warm air from above smelled like mildew and rotten wood and something else … a smell I
remembered from biology class. Reptiles. The smell of snakes.
I held my breath and climbed.
The attic was filled with Greek hero junk: armor stands covered in cobwebs; once-bright shields
pitted with rust; old leather steamer trunks plastered with stickers saying ITHAKA, CIRCE’S ISLE,
and LAND OF THE AMAZONS. One long table was stacked with glass jars filled with pickled
things-severed hairy claws, huge yellow eyes, various other parts of monsters. A dusty mounted
trophy on the wall looked like a giant snake’s head, but with horns and a full set of shark’s teeth. The
plaque read, HYDRA HEAD #1, WOODSTOCK, N.Y., 1969.
By the window, sitting on a wooden tripod stool, was the most gruesome memento of all: a
mummy. Not the wrapped-in-cloth kind, but a human female body shriveled to a husk. She wore a tiedyed sundress, lots of beaded necklaces, and a headband over long black hair. The skin of her face
was thin and leathery over her skull, and her eyes were glassy white slits, as if the real eyes had been
replaced by marbles; she’d been dead a long, long time.
Looking at her sent chills up my back. And that was before she sat up on her stool and opened her
mouth. A green mist poured from the mummy’s mouth, coiling over the floor in thick tendrils, hissing
like twenty thousand snakes. I stumbled over myself trying to get to the trapdoor, but it slammed shut.
Inside my head, I heard a voice, slithering into one ear and coiling around my brain: I am the spirit of
Delphi, speaker of the prophecies of Phoebus Apollo, slayer of the mighty Python. Approach, seeker,
and ask.
I wanted to say, No thanks, wrong door, just looking for the bathroom. But I forced myself to take
a deep breath.
The mummy wasn’t alive. She was some kind of gruesome receptacle for something else, the
power that was now swirling around me in the green mist. But its presence didn’t feel evil, like my
demonic math teacher Mrs. Dodds or the Minotaur. It felt more like the Three Fates I’d seen knitting
the yarn outside the highway fruit stand: ancient, powerful, and definitely not human. But not
particularly interested in killing me, either.
I got up the courage to ask, “What is my destiny?”
The mist swirled more thickly, collecting right in front of me and around the table with the pickled
monster-part jars. Suddenly there were four men sitting around the table, playing cards. Their faces

became clearer. It was Smelly Gabe and his buddies.
My fists clenched, though I knew this poker party couldn’t be real. It was an illusion, made out of
mist.
Gabe turned toward me and spoke in the rasping voice of the Oracle: You shall go west, and face
the god who has turned.
His buddy on the right looked up and said in the same voice: You shall find what was stolen, and
see it safely returned.
The guy on the left threw in two poker chips, then said: You shall he betrayed by one who calls
you a friend.
Finally, Eddie, our building super, delivered the worst line of all: And you shall fail to save what
matters most, in the end.
The figures began to dissolve. At first I was too stunned to say anything, but as the mist retreated,
coiling into a huge green serpent and slithering back into the mouth of the mummy, I cried, “Wait!
What do you mean? What friend? What will I fail to save?”
The tail of the mist snake disappeared into the mummy’s mouth. She reclined back against the
wall. Her mouth closed tight, as if it hadn’t been open in a hundred years. The attic was silent again,
abandoned, nothing but a room full of mementos.
I got the feeling that I could stand here until I had cobwebs, too, and I wouldn’t learn anything
else.
My audience with the Oracle was over.
“Well?” Chiron asked me.
I slumped into a chair at the pinochle table. “She said I would retrieve what was stolen.”
Grover sat forward, chewing excitedly on the remains of a Diet Coke can. “That’s great!”
“What did the Oracle say exactly?” Chiron pressed. “This is important.”
My ears were still tingling from the reptilian voice. “She . .. she said I would go west and face a
god who had turned. I would retrieve what was stolen and see it safely returned.”
“I knew it,” Grover said.
Chiron didn’t look satisfied. “Anything else?”
I didn’t want to tell him.
What friend would betray me? I didn’t have that many.
And the last line-I would fail to save what mattered most. What kind of Oracle would send me on
a quest and tell me, Oh, by the way, you’ll fail
How could I confess that?
“No,” I said. “That’s about it.”
He studied my face. “Very well, Percy. But know this: the Oracle’s words often have double
meanings. Don’t dwell on them too much. The truth is not always clear until events come to pass.”
I got the feeling he knew I was holding back something bad, and he was trying to make me feel
better.
“Okay,” I said, anxious to change topics. “So where do I go? Who’s this god in the west?”
“Ah, think, Percy,” Chiron said. “If Zeus and Poseidon weaken each other in a war, who stands to
gain?”
“Somebody else who wants to take over?” I guessed.
“Yes, quite. Someone who harbors a grudge, who has been unhappy with his lot since the world
was divided eons ago, whose kingdom would grow powerful with the deaths of millions. Someone
who hates his brothers for forcing him into an oath to have no more children, an oath that both of them

have now broken.”
I thought about my dreams, the evil voice that had spoken from under the ground. “Hades.”
Chiron nodded. “The Lord of the Dead is the only possibility.”
A scrap of aluminum dribbled out of Grover’s mouth. “Whoa, wait. Wh-what?”
“A Fury came after Percy,” Chiron reminded him. “She watched the young man until she was sure
of his identity, then tried to kill him. Furies obey only one lord: Hades.”
“Yes, but-but Hades hates all heroes,” Grover protested. “Especially if he has found out Percy is
a son of Poseidon… .”
“A hellhound got into the forest,” Chiron continued. “Those can only be summoned from the
Fields of Punishment, and it had to be summoned by someone within the camp. Hades must have a spy
here. He must suspect Poseidon will try to use Percy to clear his name. Hades would very much like
to kill this young half-blood before he can take on the quest.”
“Great,” I muttered. “That’s two major gods who want to kill me.”
“But a quest to …” Grover swallowed. “I mean, couldn’t the master bolt be in some place like
Maine? Maine’s very nice this time of year.”
“Hades sent a minion to steal the master bolt,” Chiron insisted. “He hid it in the Underworld,
knowing full well that Zeus would blame Poseidon. I don’t pretend to understand the Lord of the
Dead’s motives perfectly, or why he chose this time to start a war, but one thing is certain. Percy must
go to the Underworld, find the master bolt, and reveal the truth.”
A strange fire burned in my stomach. The weirdest thing was: it wasn’t fear. It was anticipation.
The desire for revenge. Hades had tried to kill me three times so far, with the Fury, the Minotaur, and
the hellhound. It was his fault my mother had disappeared in a flash of light. Now he was trying to
frame me and my dad for a theft we hadn’t committed.
I was ready to take him on.
Besides, if my mother was in the Underworld …
Whoa, boy, said the small part of my brain that was still sane. You’re a kid. Hades is a god.
Grover was trembling. He’d started eating pinochle cards like potato chips.
The poor guy needed to complete a quest with me so he could get his searcher’s license, whatever
that was, but how could I ask him to do this quest, especially when the Oracle said I was destined to
fail? This was suicide.
“Look, if we know it’s Hades,” I told Chiron, “why can’t we just tell the other gods? Zeus or
Poseidon could go down to the Underworld and bust some heads.”
“Suspecting and knowing are not the same,” Chiron said. “Besides, even if the other gods suspect
Hades-and I imagine Poseidon does-they couldn’t retrieve the bolt themselves. Gods cannot cross
each other’s territories except by invitation. That is another ancient rule. Heroes, on the other hand,
have certain privileges. They can go anywhere, challenge anyone, as long as they’re bold enough and
strong enough to do it. No god can be held responsible for a hero’s actions. Why do you think the
gods always operate through humans?”
“You’re saying I’m being used.”
“I’m saying it’s no accident Poseidon has claimed you now. It’s a very risky gamble, but he’s in a
desperate situation. He needs you.”
My dad needs me.
Emotions rolled around inside me like bits of glass in a kaleidoscope. I didn’t know whether to
feel resentful or grateful or happy or angry. Poseidon had ignored me for twelve years. Now suddenly
he needed me.

I looked at Chiron. “You’ve known I was Poseidon’s son all along, haven’t you?”
“I had my suspicions. As I said … I’ve spoken to the Oracle, too.”
I got the feeling there was a lot he wasn’t telling me about his prophecy, but I decided I couldn’t
worry about that right now. After all, I was holding back information too.
“So let me get this straight,” I said. “I’m supposed go to the Underworld and confront the Lord of
the Dead.”
“Check,” Chiron said.
“Find the most powerful weapon in the universe.”
“Check.”
“And get it back to Olympus before the summer solstice, in ten days.”
“That’s about right.”
I looked at Grover, who gulped down the ace of hearts.
“Did I mention that Maine is very nice this time of year?” he asked weakly.
“You don’t have to go,” I told him. “I can’t ask that of you.
“Oh …” He shifted his hooves. “No … it’s just that satyrs and underground places … well…”
He took a deep breath, then stood, brushing the shredded cards and aluminum bits off his T-shirt.
“You saved my life, Percy. If … if you’re serious about wanting me along, I won’t let you down.”
I felt so relieved I wanted to cry, though I didn’t think that would be very heroic. Grover was the
only friend I’d ever had for longer than a few months. I wasn’t sure what good a satyr could do
against the forces of the dead, but I felt better knowing he’d be with me.
“All the way, G-man.” I turned to Chiron. “So where do we go? The Oracle just said to go west.”
“The entrance to the Underworld is always in the west. It moves from age to age, just like
Olympus. Right now, of course, it’s in America.”
“Where?”
Chiron looked surprised. “I thought that would be obvious enough. The entrance to the
Underworld is in Los Angeles.”
“Oh,” I said. “Naturally. So we just get on a plane-“
“No!” Grover shrieked. “Percy, what are you thinking? Have you ever been on a plane in your
life?”
I shook my head, feeling embarrassed. My mom had never taken me anywhere by plane. She’d
always said we didn’t have the money. Besides, her parents had died in a plane crash.
“Percy, think,” Chiron said. “You are the son of the Sea God. Your father’s bitterest rival is Zeus,
Lord of the Sky. Your mother knew better than to trust you in an airplane. You would be in Zeus’s
domain. You would never come down again alive.”
Overhead, lightning crackled. Thunder boomed.
“Okay,” I said, determined not to look at the storm. “So, I’ll travel overland.”
“That’s right,” Chiron said. “Two companions may accompany you. Grover is one. The other has
already volunteered, if you will accept her help.”
“Gee,” I said, feigning surprise. “Who else would be stupid enough to volunteer for a quest like
this?”
The air shimmered behind Chiron.
Annabeth became visible, stuffing her Yankees cap into her back pocket.
“I’ve been waiting a long time for a quest, seaweed brain,” she said. “Athena is no fan of
Poseidon, but if you’re going to save the world, I’m the best person to keep you from messing up.”
“If you do say so yourself,” I said. “I suppose you have a plan, wise girl?”

Her cheeks colored. “Do you want my help or not?”
The truth was, I did. I needed all the help I could get.
“A trio,” I said. “That’ll work.”
“Excellent,” Chiron said. “This afternoon, we can take you as far as the bus terminal in
Manhattan. After that, you are on your own.”
Lightning flashed. Rain poured down on the meadows that were never supposed to have violent
weather.
“No time to waste,” Chiron said. “I think you should all get packing.”

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
10 I RUIN A PERFECTLY
GOOD BUS
It didn’t take me long to pack. I decided to leave the Minotaur horn in my cabin, which left me
only an extra change of clothes and a toothbrush to stuff in a backpack Grover had found for me.
The camp store loaned me one hundred dollars in mortal money and twenty golden drachmas.
These coins were as big as Girl Scout cookies and had images of various Greek gods stamped on one
side and the Empire State Building on the other. The ancient mortal drachmas had been silver, Chiron
told us, but Olympians never used less than pure gold. Chiron said the coins might come in handy for
non-mortal transactions-whatever that meant. He gave Annabeth and me each a canteen of nectar and
a Ziploc bag full of ambrosia squares, to be used only in emergencies, if we were seriously hurt. It
was god food, Chiron reminded us. It would cure us of almost any injury, but it was lethal to mortals.
Too much of it would make a half-blood very, very feverish. An overdose would burn us up, literally.
Annabeth was bringing her magic Yankees cap, which she told me had been a twelfth-birthday
present from her mom. She carried a book on famous classical architecture, written in Ancient Greek,
to read when she got bored, and a long bronze knife, hidden in her shirt sleeve. I was sure the knife
would get us busted the first time we went through a metal detector.
Grover wore his fake feet and his pants to pass as human. He wore a green rasta-style cap,
because when it rained his curly hair flattened and you could just see the tips of his horns. His bright
orange backpack was full of scrap metal and apples to snack on. In his pocket was a set of reed pipes
his daddy goat had carved for him, even though he only knew two songs: Mozart’s Piano Concerto no.
12 and Hilary Duff’s “So Yesterday,” both of which sounded pretty bad on reed pipes.
We waved good-bye to the other campers, took one last look at the strawberry fields, the ocean,
and the Big House, then hiked up Half-Blood Hill to the tall pine tree that used to be Thalia, daughter
of Zeus.
Chiron was waiting for us in his wheelchair. Next to him stood the surfer dude I’d seen when I
was recovering in the sick room. According to Grover, the guy was the camp’s head of security. He
supposedly had eyes all over his body so he could never be surprised. Today, though, he was wearing
a chauffeur’s uniform, so I could only see extra peepers on his hands, face and neck.
“This is Argus,” Chiron told me. “He will drive you into the city, and, er, well, keep an eye on
things.”
I heard footsteps behind us.
Luke came running up the hill, carrying a pair of basketball shoes.
“Hey!” he panted. “Glad I caught you.”
Annabeth blushed, the way she always did when Luke was around.
“Just wanted to say good luck,” Luke told me. “And I thought … um, maybe you could use these.”
He handed me the sneakers, which looked pretty normal. They even smelled kind of normal.
Luke said, “Maia!”
White bird’s wings sprouted out of the heels, startling me so much, I dropped them. The shoes
flapped around on the ground until the wings folded up and disappeared.
“Awesome!” Grover said.

Luke smiled. “Those served me well when I was on my quest. Gift from Dad. Of course, I don’t
use them much these days….” His expression turned sad.
I didn’t know what to say. It was cool enough that Luke had come to say good-bye. I’d been afraid
he might resent me for getting so much attention the last few days. But here he was giving me a magic
gift…. It made me blush almost as much as Annabeth.
“Hey, man,” I said. “Thanks.”
“Listen, Percy …” Luke looked uncomfortable. “A lot of hopes are riding on you. So just … kill
some monsters for me, okay?”
We shook hands. Luke patted Grover’s head between his horns, then gave a good-bye hug to
Annabeth, who looked like she might pass out.
After Luke was gone, I told her, “You’re hyperventilating.”
“Am not.”
“You let him capture the flag instead of you, didn’t you?”
“Oh … why do I want to go anywhere with you, Percy?”
She stomped down the other side of the hill, where a white SUV waited on the shoulder of the
road. Argus followed, jingling his car keys.
I picked up the flying shoes and had a sudden bad feeling. I looked at Chiron. “I won’t be able to
use these, will I?”
He shook his head. “Luke meant well, Percy. But taking to the air … that would not be wise for
you.”
I nodded, disappointed, but then I got an idea. “Hey, Grover. You want a magic item?”
His eyes lit up. “Me?”
Pretty soon we’d laced the sneakers over his fake feet, and the world’s first flying goat boy was
ready for launch.
“Maia!” he shouted.
He got off the ground okay, but then fell over sideways so his backpack dragged through the grass.
The winged shoes kept bucking up and down like tiny broncos.
“Practice,” Chiron called after him. “You just need practice!”
“Aaaaa!” Grover went flying sideways down the hill like a possessed lawn mower, heading
toward the van.
Before I could follow, Chiron caught my arm. “I should have trained you better, Percy,” he said.
“If only I had more time. Hercules, Jason-they all got more training.”
“That’s okay. I just wish-“
I stopped myself because I was about to sound like a brat. I was wishing my dad had given me a
cool magic item to help on the quest, something as good as Luke’s flying shoes, or Annabeth’s
invisible cap.
“What am I thinking?” Chiron cried. “I can’t let you get away without this.”
He pulled a pen from his coat pocket and handed it to me. It was an ordinary disposable ballpoint,
black ink, removable cap. Probably cost thirty cents.
“Gee,” I said. “Thanks.”
“Percy, that’s a gift from your father. I’ve kept it for years, not knowing you were who I was
waiting for. But the prophecy is clear to me now. You are the one.”
I remembered the field trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, when I’d vaporized Mrs. Dodds.
Chiron had thrown me a pen that turned into a sword. Could this be … ?
I took off the cap, and the pen grew longer and heavier in my hand. In half a second, I held a

shimmering bronze sword with a double-edged blade, a leather-wrapped grip, and a flat hilt riveted
with gold studs. It was the first weapon that actually felt balanced in my hand.
“The sword has a long and tragic history that we need not go into,” Chiron told me. “Its name is
Anaklusmos.”
“‘Riptide,’” I translated, surprised the Ancient Greek came so easily.
“Use it only for emergencies,” Chiron said, “and only against monsters. No hero should harm
mortals unless absolutely necessary, of course, but this sword wouldn’t harm them in any case.”
I looked at the wickedly sharp blade. “What do you mean it wouldn’t harm mortals? How could it
not?”
“The sword is celestial bronze. Forged by the Cyclopes, tempered in the heart of Mount Etna,
cooled in the River Lethe. It’s deadly to monsters, to any creature from the Underworld, provided
they don’t kill you first. But the blade will pass through mortals like an illusion. They simply are not
important enough for the blade to kill. And I should warn you: as a demigod, you can be killed by
either celestial or normal weapons. You are twice as vulnerable.”
“Good to know.”
“Now recap the pen.”
I touched the pen cap to the sword tip and instantly Riptide shrank to a ballpoint pen again. I
tucked it in my pocket, a little nervous, because I was famous for losing pens at school.
“You can’t,” Chiron said.
“Can’t what?”
“Lose the pen,” he said. “It is enchanted. It will always reappear in your pocket. Try it.”
I was wary, but I threw the pen as far as I could down the hill and watched it disappear in the
grass.
“It may take a few moments,” Chiron told me. “Now check your pocket.”
Sure enough, the pen was there.
“Okay, that’s extremely cool,” I admitted. “But what if a mortal sees me pulling out a sword?”
Chiron smiled. “Mist is a powerful thing, Percy.”
“Mist?”
“Yes. Read The Iliad. It’s full of references to the stuff. Whenever divine or monstrous elements
mix with the mortal world, they generate Mist, which obscures the vision of humans. You will see
things just as they are, being a half-blood, but humans will interpret things quite differently.
Remarkable, really, the lengths to which humans will go to fit things into their version of reality.”
I put Riptide back in my pocket.
For the first time, the quest felt real. I was actually leaving Half-Blood Hill. I was heading west
with no adult supervision, no backup plan, not even a cell phone. (Chiron said cell phones were
traceable by monsters; if we used one, it would be worse than sending up a flare.) I had no weapon
stronger than a sword to fight off monsters and reach the Land of the Dead.
“Chiron …” I said. “When you say the gods are immortal… I mean, there was a time before them,
right?”
“Four ages before them, actually. The Time of the Titans was the Fourth Age, sometimes called
the Golden Age, which is definitely a misnomer. This, the time of Western civilization and the rule of
Zeus, is the Fifth Age.”
“So what was it like … before the gods?”
Chiron pursed his lips. “Even I am not old enough to remember that, child, but I know it was a
time of darkness and savagery for mortals. Kronos, the lord of the Titans, called his reign the Golden

Age because men lived innocent and free of all knowledge. But that was mere propaganda. The Titan
king cared nothing for your kind except as appetizers or a source of cheap entertainment. It was only
in the early reign of Lord Zeus, when Prometheus the good Titan brought fire to mankind, that your
species began to progress, and even then Prometheus was branded a radical thinker. Zeus punished
him severely, as you may recall. Of course, eventually the gods warmed to humans, and Western
civilization was born.”
“But the gods can’t die now, right? I mean, as long as Western civilization is alive, they’re alive.
So … even if I failed, nothing could happen so bad it would mess up everything, right?”
Chiron gave me a melancholy smile. “No one knows how long the Age of the West will last,
Percy. The gods are immortal, yes. But then, so were the Titans. They still exist, locked away in their
various prisons, forced to endure endless pain and punishment, reduced in power, but still very much
alive. May the Fates forbid that the gods should ever suffer such a doom, or that we should ever
return to the darkness and chaos of the past. All we can do, child, is follow our destiny.”
“Our destiny … assuming we know what that is.”
“Relax,” Chiron told me. “Keep a clear head. And remember, you may be about to prevent the
biggest war in human history.”
“Relax,” I said. “I’m very relaxed.”
When I got to the bottom of the hill, I looked back. Under the pine tree that used to be Thalia,
daughter of Zeus, Chiron was now standing in full horse-man form, holding his bow high in salute.
Just your typical summer-camp send-off by your typical centaur.
***
Argus drove us out of the countryside and into western Long Island. It felt weird to be on a
highway again, Annabeth and Grover sitting next to me as if we were normal carpoolers. After two
weeks at Half-Blood Hill, the real world seemed like a fantasy. I found myself staring at every
McDonald’s, every kid in the back of his parents’ car, every billboard and shopping mall.
“So far so good,” I told Annabeth. “Ten miles and not a single monster.”
She gave me an irritated look. “It’s bad luck to talk that way, seaweed brain.”
“Remind me again-why do you hate me so much?”
“I don’t hate you.”
“Could’ve fooled me.”
She folded her cap of invisibility. “Look … we’re just not supposed to get along, okay? Our
parents are rivals.”
“Why?”
She sighed. “How many reasons do you want? One time my mom caught Poseidon with his
girlfriend in Athena’s temple, which is hugely disrespectful. Another time, Athena and Poseidon
competed to be the patron god for the city of Athens. Your dad created some stupid saltwater spring
for his gift. My mom created the olive tree. The people saw that her gift was better, so they named the
city after her.”
“They must really like olives.”
“Oh, forget it.”
“Now, if she’d invented pizza-that I could understand.”
“I said, forget it!”
In the front seat, Argus smiled. He didn’t say anything, but one blue eye on the back of his neck
winked at me.
Traffic slowed us down in Queens. By the time we got into Manhattan it was sunset and starting to

you!”
The Chimera charged, its lion teeth gnashing. I managed to leap aside and dodge the bite.
I ended up next to the family and the park ranger, who were all screaming now, trying to pry open
the emergency exit doors.
I couldn’t let them get hurt. I uncapped my sword, ran to the other side of the deck, and yelled,
“Hey, Chihuahua!” The Chimera turned faster than I would’ve thought possible.
Before I could swing my sword, it opened its mouth, emitting a stench like the world’s largest
barbecue pit, and shot a column of flame straight at me.
I dove through the explosion. The carpet burst into flames; the heat was so intense, it nearly
seared off my eyebrows.
Where I had been standing a moment before was a ragged hole in the side of the Arch, with
melted metal steaming around the edges.
Great, I thought. We just blowtorched a national monument.
Riptide was now a shining bronze blade in my hands, and as the Chimera turned, I slashed at its
neck.
That was my fatal mistake. The blade sparked harmlessly off the dog collar. I tried to regain my
balance, but I was so worried about defending myself against the fiery lion’s mouth, I completely
forgot about the serpent tail until it whipped around and sank its fangs into my calf.
My whole leg was on fire. I tried to jab Riptide into the Chimera’s mouth, but the serpent tail
wrapped around my ankles and pulled me off balance, and my blade flew out of my hand, spinning out
of the hole in the Arch and down toward the Mississippi River.
I managed to get to my feet, but I knew I had lost. I was weaponless. I could feel deadly poison
racing up to my chest. I remembered Chiron saying that Anaklusmos would always return to me, but
there was no pen in my pocket. Maybe it had fallen too far away. Maybe it only returned when it was
in pen form. I didn’t know, and I wasn’t going to live long enough to figure it out.
I backed into the hole in the wall. The Chimera advanced, growling, smoke curling from its lips.
The snake lady, Echidna, cackled. “They don’t make heroes like they used to, eh, son?”
The monster growled. It seemed in no hurry to finish me off now that I was beaten.
I glanced at the park ranger and the family. The little boy was hiding behind his father’s legs. I
had to protect these people. I couldn’t just … die. I tried to think, but my whole body was on fire. My
head felt dizzy. I had no sword. I was facing a massive, fire-breathing monster and its mother. And I
was scared.
There was no place else to go, so I stepped to the edge of the hole. Far, far below, the river
glittered.
If I died, would the monsters go away? Would they leave the humans alone?
“If you are the son of Poseidon,” Echidna hissed, “you would not fear water. Jump, Percy
Jackson. Show me that water will not harm you. Jump and retrieve your sword. Prove your
bloodline.”
Yeah, right, I thought. I’d read somewhere that jumping into water from a couple of stories up was
like jumping onto solid asphalt. From here, I’d splatter on impact.
The Chimera’s mouth glowed red, heating up for another blast.
“You have no faith,” Echidna told me. “You do not trust the gods. I cannot blame you, little
coward. Better you die now. The gods are faithless. The poison is in your heart.”
She was right: I was dying. I could feel my breath slowing down. Nobody could save me, not
even the gods.

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
15 A GOD BUYS US
CHEESEBURGERS
The next afternoon, June 14, seven days before the solstice, our train rolled into Denver. We
hadn’t eaten since the night before in the dining car, somewhere in Kansas. We hadn’t taken a shower
since Half-Blood Hill, and I was sure that was obvious.
“Let’s try to contact Chiron,” Annabeth said. “I want to tell him about your talk with the river
spirit.”
“We can’t use phones, right?”
“I’m not talking about phones.”
We wandered through downtown for about half an hour, though I wasn’t sure what Annabeth was
looking for. The air was dry and hot, which felt weird after the humidity of St. Louis. Everywhere we
turned, the Rocky Mountains seemed to be staring at me, like a tidal wave about to crash into the city.
Finally we found an empty do-it-yourself car wash. We veered toward the stall farthest from the
street, keeping our eyes open for patrol cars. We were three adolescents hanging out at a car wash
without a car; any cop worth his doughnuts would figure we were up to no good.
“What exactly are we doing?” I asked, as Grover took out the spray gun.
“It’s seventy-five cents,” he grumbled. “I’ve only got two quarters left. Annabeth?”
“Don’t look at me,” she said. “The dining car wiped me out.”
I fished out my last bit of change and passed Grover a quarter, which left me two nickels and one
drachma from Medusa’s place.
“Excellent,” Grover said. “We could do it with a spray bottle, of course, but the connection isn’t
as good, and my arm gets tired of pumping.”
“What are you talking about?”
He fed in the quarters and set the knob to FINE MIST. “I-M’ing.”
“Instant messaging?”
“Iris-messaging,” Annabeth corrected. “The rainbow goddess Iris carries messages for the gods.
If you know how to ask, and she’s not too busy, she’ll do the same for half-bloods.”
“You summon the goddess with a spray gun?”
Grover pointed the nozzle in the air and water hissed out in a thick white mist. “Unless you know
an easier way to make a rainbow.”
Sure enough, late afternoon light filtered through the vapor and broke into colors.
Annabeth held her palm out to me. “Drachma, please.”
I handed it over.
She raised the coin over her head. “O goddess, accept our offering.”
She threw the drachma into the rainbow. It disappeared in a golden shimmer.
“Half-Blood Hill,” Annabeth requested.
For a moment, nothing happened.
Then I was looking through the mist at strawberry fields, and the Long Island Sound in the
distance. We seemed to be on the porch of the Big House. Standing with his back to us at the railing
was a sandy-haired guy in shorts and an orange tank top. He was holding a bronze sword and seemed

to be staring intently at something down in the meadow.
“Luke!” I called.
He turned, eyes wide. I could swear he was standing three feet in front of me through a screen of
mist, except I could only see the part of him that appeared in the rainbow.
“Percy!” His scarred face broke into a grin. “Is that Annabeth, too? Thank the gods! Are you guys
okay?”
“We’re … uh … fine,” Annabeth stammered. She was madly straightening her dirty T-shirt, trying
to comb the loose hair out of her face. “We thought-Chiron-I mean-“
“He’s down at the cabins.” Luke’s smile faded. “We’re having some issues with the campers.
Listen, is everything cool with you? Is Grover all right?”
“I’m right here,” Grover called. He held the nozzle out to one side and stepped into Luke’s line of
vision. “What kind of issues?”
Just then a big Lincoln Continental pulled into the car wash with its stereo turned to maximum hiphop. As the car slid into the next stall, the bass from the subwoofers vibrated so much, it shook the
pavement.
“Chiron had to-what’s that noise?” Luke yelled.
“I’ll take care of it.’” Annabeth yelled back, looking very relieved to have an excuse to get out of
sight. “Grover, come on!
“What?” Grover said. “But-“
“Give Percy the nozzle and come on!” she ordered.
Grover muttered something about girls being harder to understand than the Oracle at Delphi, then
he handed me the spray gun and followed Annabeth.
I readjusted the hose so I could keep the rainbow going and still see Luke.
“Chiron had to break up a fight,” Luke shouted to me over the music. “Things are pretty tense
here, Percy. Word leaked out about the Zeus-Poseidon standoff. We’re still not sure how-probably
the same scumbag who summoned the hellhound. Now the campers are starting to take sides. It’s
shaping up like the Trojan War all over again. Aphrodite, Ares, and Apollo are backing Poseidon,
more or less. Athena is backing Zeus.”
I shuddered to think that Clarisse’s cabin would ever be on my dad’s side for anything. In the next
stall, I heard Annabeth and some guy arguing with each other, then the music’s volume decreased
drastically.
“So what’s your status?” Luke asked me. “Chiron will be sorry he missed you.”
I told him pretty much everything, including my dreams. It felt so good to see him, to feel like I
was back at camp even for a few minutes, that I didn’t realize how long I had talked until the beeper
went off on the spray machine, and I realized I only had one more minute before the water shut off.
“I wish I could be there,” Luke told me. “We can’t help much from here, I’m afraid, but listen …
it had to be Hades who took the master bolt. He was there at Olympus at the winter solstice. I was
chaperoning a field trip and we saw him.”
“But Chiron said the gods can’t take each other’s magic items directly.”
“That’s true,” Luke said, looking troubled. “Still … Hades has the helm of darkness. How could
anybody else sneak into the throne room and steal the master bolt? You’d have to be invisible.”
We were both silent, until Luke seemed to realize what he’d said.
“Oh, hey,” he protested. “I didn’t mean Annabeth. She and I have known each other forever. She
would never … I mean, she’s like a little sister to me.”
I wondered if Annabeth would like that description. In the stall next to us, the music stopped

the truck bumping around. We told Grover to promise the animals we’d help them more in the
morning, then we settled in for night.
Grover curled up on a turnip sack; Annabeth opened our bag of Double Stuf Oreos and nibbled on
one halfheartedly; I tried to cheer myself up by concentrating on the fact that we were halfway to Los
Angeles. Halfway to our destination. It was only June fourteenth. The solstice wasn’t until the twentyfirst. We could make it in plenty of time.
On the other hand, I had no idea what to expect next. The gods kept toying with me. At least
Hephaestus had the decency to be honest about it-he’d put up cameras and advertised me as
entertainment. But even when the cameras weren’t rolling, I had a feeling my quest was being
watched. I was a source of amusement for the gods.
“Hey,” Annabeth said, “I’m sorry for freaking out back at the water park, Percy.”
“That’s okay.”
“It’s just…” She shuddered. “Spiders.”
“Because of the Arachne story,” I guessed. “She got turned into a spider for challenging your mom
to a weaving contest, right?”
Annabeth nodded. “Arachne’s children have been taking revenge on the children of Athena ever
since. If there’s a spider within a mile of me, it’ll find me. I hate the creepy little things. Anyway, I
owe you.”
“We’re a team, remember?” I said. “Besides, Grover did the fancy flying.”
I thought he was asleep, but he mumbled from the corner, “I was pretty amazing, wasn’t I?”
Annabeth and I laughed.
She pulled apart an Oreo, handed me half. “In the Iris message … did Luke really say nothing?”
I munched my cookie and thought about how to answer. The conversation via rainbow had
bothered me all evening. “Luke said you and he go way back. He also said Grover wouldn’t fail this
time. Nobody would turn into a pine tree.”
In the dim bronze light of the sword blade, it was hard to read their expressions.
Grover let out a mournful bray.
“I should’ve told you the truth from the beginning.” His voice trembled. “I thought if you knew
what a failure I was, you wouldn’t want me along.”
“You were the satyr who tried to rescue Thalia, the daughter of Zeus.”
He nodded glumly.
“And the other two half-bloods Thalia befriended, the ones who got safely to camp …” I looked
at Annabeth. “That was you and Luke, wasn’t it?”
She put down her Oreo, uneaten. “Like you said, Percy, a seven-year-old half-blood wouldn’t
have made it very far alone. Athena guided me toward help. Thalia was twelve. Luke was fourteen.
They’d both run away from home, like me. They were happy to take me with them. They were …
amazing monster-fighters, even without training. We traveled north from Virginia without any real
plans, fending off monsters for about two weeks before Grover found us.”
“I was supposed to escort Thalia to camp,” he said, sniffling. “Only Thalia. I had strict orders
from Chiron: don’t do anything that would slow down the rescue. We knew Hades was after her, see,
but I couldn’t just leave Luke and Annabeth by themselves. I thought … I thought I could lead all three
of them to safety. It was my fault the Kindly Ones caught up with us. I froze. I got scared on the way
back to camp and took some wrong turns. If I’d just been a little quicker …”
“Stop it,” Annabeth said. “No one blames you. Thalia didn’t blame you either.”
“She sacrificed herself to save us,” he said miserably, “Her death was my fault. The Council of

Cloven Elders said so.”
“Because you wouldn’t leave two other half-bloods behind?” I said. “That’s not fair.”
“Percy’s right,” Annabeth said. “I wouldn’t be here today if it weren’t for you, Grover. Neither
would Luke. We don’t care what the council says.”
Grover kept sniffling in the dark. “It’s just my luck. I’m the lamest satyr ever, and I find the two
most powerful half-bloods of the century, Thalia and Percy.”
“You’re not lame,” Annabeth insisted. “You’ve got more courage than any satyr I’ve ever met.
Name one other who would dare go to the Underworld. I bet Percy is really glad you’re here right
now.”
She kicked me in the shin.
“Yeah,” I said, which I would’ve done even without the kick. “It’s not luck that you found Thalia
and me, Grover. You’ve got the biggest heart of any satyr ever. You’re a natural searcher. That’s why
you’ll be the one who finds Pan.”
I heard a deep, satisfied sigh. I waited for Grover to say something, but his breathing only got
heavier. When the sound turned to snoring, I realized he’d fallen sleep.
“How does he do that?” I marveled.
“I don’t know,” Annabeth said. “But that was really a nice thing you told him.”
“I meant it.”
We rode in silence for a few miles, bumping around on the feed sacks. The zebra munched a
turnip. The lion licked the last of the hamburger meat off his lips and looked at me hopefully.
Annabeth rubbed her necklace like she was thinking deep, strategic thoughts.
“That pine-tree bead,” I said. “Is that from your first year?”
She looked. She hadn’t realized what she was doing.
“Yeah,” she said. “Every August, the counselors pick the most important event of the summer, and
they paint it on that year’s beads. I’ve got Thalia’s pine tree, a Greek trireme on fire, a centaur in a
prom dress-now that was a weird summer….”
“And the college ring is your father’s?”
“That’s none of your-” She stopped herself. “Yeah. Yeah, it is.”
“You don’t have to tell me.”
“No … it’s okay.” She took a shaky breath. “My dad sent it to me folded up in a letter, two
summers ago. The ring was, like, his main keepsake from Athena. He wouldn’t have gotten through
his doctoral program at Harvard without her…. That’s a long story. Anyway, he said he wanted me to
have it. He apologized for being a jerk, said he loved me and missed me. He wanted me to come
home and live with him.”
“That doesn’t sound so bad.”
“Yeah, well… the problem was, I believed him. I tried to go home for that school year, but my
stepmom was the same as ever. She didn’t want her kids put in danger by living with a freak.
Monsters attacked. We argued. Monsters attacked. We argued. I didn’t even make it through winter
break. I called Chiron and came right back to Camp Half-Blood.”
“You think you’ll ever try living with your dad again?”
She wouldn’t meet my eyes. “Please. I’m not into self-inflicted pain.”
“You shouldn’t give up,” I told her. “You should write him a letter or something.”
“Thanks for the advice,” she said coldly, “but my father’s made his choice about who he wants to
live with.”
We passed another few miles of silence.

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
18 ANNABETH DOES
OBEDIENCE SCHOOL
We stood in the shadows of Valencia Boulevard, looking up at gold letters etched in black
marble: DOA RECORDING STUDIOS.
Underneath, stenciled on the glass doors: NO SOLICITORS. NO LOITERING. NO LIVING.
It was almost midnight, but the lobby was brightly lit and full of people. Behind the security desk
sat a tough-looking guard with sunglasses and an earpiece.
I turned to my friends. “Okay. You remember the plan.”
“The plan,” Grover gulped. “Yeah. I love the plan.”
Annabeth said, “What happens if the plan doesn’t work?”
“Don’t think negative.”
“Right,” she said. “We’re entering the Land of the Dead, and I shouldn’t think negative.”
I took the pearls out of my pocket, the three milky spheres the Nereid had given me in Santa
Monica. They didn’t seem like much of a backup in case something went wrong.
Annabeth put her hand on my shoulder. “I’m sorry, Percy. You’re right, we’ll make it. It’ll be
fine.”
She gave Grover a nudge.
“Oh, right!” he chimed in. “We got this far. We’ll find the master bolt and save your mom. No
problem.”
I looked at them both, and felt really grateful. Only a few minutes before, I’d almost gotten them
stretched to death on deluxe water beds, and now they were trying to be brave for my sake, trying to
make me feel better.
I slipped the pearls back in my pocket. “Let’s whup some Underworld butt.”
We walked inside the DOA lobby.
Muzak played softly on hidden speakers. The carpet and walls were steel gray. Pencil cactuses
grew in the corners like skeleton hands. The furniture was black leather, and every seat was taken.
There were people sitting on couches, people standing up, people staring out the windows or waiting
for the elevator. Nobody moved, or talked, or did much of anything. Out of the corner of my eye, I
could see them all just fine, but if I focused on any one of them in particular, they started looking …
transparent. I could see right through their bodies.
The security guard’s desk was a raised podium, so we had to look up at him.
He was tall and elegant, with chocolate-colored skin and bleached-blond hair shaved military
style. He wore tortoiseshell shades and a silk Italian suit that matched his hair. A black rose was
pinned to his lapel under a silver name tag.
I read the name tag, then looked at him in bewilderment. “Your name is Chiron?”
He leaned across the desk. I couldn’t see anything in his glasses except my own reflection, but his
smile was sweet and cold, like a pythons, right before it eats you.
“What a precious young lad.” He had a strange accent-British, maybe, but also as if he had
learned English as a second language. “Tell me, mate, do I look like a centaur?”
“N-no.”

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
21 I SETTLE
MY TAB
It’s funny how humans can wrap their mind around things and fit them into their version of reality.
Chiron had told me that long ago. As usual, I didn’t appreciate his wisdom until much later.
According to the L.A. news, the explosion at the Santa Monica beach had been caused when a
crazy kidnapper fired a shotgun at a police car. He accidentally hit a gas main that had ruptured
during the earthquake.
This crazy kidnapper (a.k.a. Ares) was the same man who had abducted me and two other
adolescents in New York and brought us across country on a ten-day odyssey of terror.
Poor little Percy Jackson wasn’t an international criminal after all. He’d caused a commotion on
that Greyhound bus in New Jersey trying to get away from his captor (and afterward, witnesses would
even swear they had seen the leather-clad man on the bus-“Why didn’t I remember him before?”). The
crazy man had caused the explosion in the St. Louis Arch. After all, no kid could’ve done that. A
concerned waitress in Denver had seen the man threatening his abductees outside her diner, gotten a
friend to take a photo, and notified the police. Finally, brave Percy Jackson (I was beginning to like
this kid) had stolen a gun from his captor in Los Angeles and battled him shotgun-to-rifle on the
beach. Police had arrived just in time. But in the spectacular explosion, five police cars had been
destroyed and the captor had fled. No fatalities had occurred. Percy Jackson and his two friends were
safely in police custody.
The reporters fed us this whole story. We just nodded and acted tearful and exhausted (which
wasn’t hard), and played victimized kids for the cameras.
“All I want,” I said, choking back my tears, “is to see my loving stepfather again. Every time I
saw him on TV, calling me a delinquent punk, I knew … somehow … we would be okay. And I know
he’ll want to reward each and every person in this beautiful city of Los Angeles with a free major
appliance from his store. Here’s the phone number.” The police and reporters were so moved that
they passed around the hat and raised money for three tickets on the next plane to New York.
I knew there was no choice but to fly. I hoped Zeus would cut me some slack, considering the
circumstances. But it was still hard to force myself on board the flight.
Takeoff was a nightmare. Every spot of turbulence was scarier than a Greek monster. I didn’t
unclench my hands from the armrests until we touched down safely at La Guardia. The local press
was waiting for us outside security, but we managed to evade them thanks to Annabeth, who lured
them away in her invisible Yankees cap, shouting, “They’re over by the frozen yogurt! Come on!”
then rejoined us at baggage claim.
We split up at the taxi stand. I told Annabeth and Grover to get back to Half-Blood Hill and let
Chiron know what had happened. They protested, and it was hard to let them go after all we’d been
through, but I knew I had to do this last part of the quest by myself. If things went wrong, if the gods
didn’t believe me … I wanted Annabeth and Grover to survive to tell Chiron the truth.
I hopped in a taxi and headed into Manhattan.
Thirty minutes later, I walked into the lobby of the Empire State Building.
I must have looked like a homeless kid, with my tattered clothes and my scraped-up face. I hadn’t

are. That’s where you learn whether you’re any good or not.
I thought about the fate of Thalia, daughter of Zeus. I wondered how many monsters would attack
me if I left Half-Blood Hill. If I stayed in one place for a whole school year, without Chiron or my
friends around to help me, would my mother and I even survive until the next summer? That was
assuming the spelling tests and five-paragraph essays didn’t kill me. I decided I’d go down to the
arena and do some sword practice. Maybe that would clear my head.
The campgrounds were mostly deserted, shimmering in the August heat. All the campers were in
their cabins packing up, or running around with brooms and mops, getting ready for final inspection.
Argus was helping some of the Aphrodite kids haul their Gucci suitcases and makeup kits over the
hill, where the camp’s shuttle bus would be waiting to take them to the airport.
Don’t think about leaving yet, I told myself. Just train.
I got to the sword-fighters arena and found that Luke had had the same idea. His gym bag was
plopped at the edge of the stage. He was working solo, whaling on battle dummies with a sword I’d
never seen before. It must’ve been a regular steel blade, because he was slashing the dummies’ heads
right off, stabbing through their straw-stuffed guts. His orange counselor’s shirt was dripping with
sweat. His expression was so intense, his life might’ve really been in danger. I watched, fascinated,
as he disemboweled the whole row of dummies, hacking off limbs and basically reducing them to a
pile of straw and armor.
They were only dummies, but I still couldn’t help being awed by Luke’s skill. The guy was an
incredible fighter. It made me wonder, again, how he possibly could’ve failed at his quest.
Finally, he saw me, and stopped mid-swing. “Percy.”
“Um, sorry,” I said, embarrassed. “I just-“
“It’s okay,” he said, lowering his sword. “Just doing some last-minute practice.”
“Those dummies won’t be bothering anybody anymore.”
Luke shrugged. “We build new ones every summer.”
Now that his sword wasn’t swirling around, I could see something odd about it. The blade was
two different types of metal-one edge bronze, the other steel.
Luke noticed me looking at it. “Oh, this? New toy. This is Backbiter.”
“Backbiter?”
Luke turned the blade in the light so it glinted wickedly. “One side is celestial bronze. The other
is tempered steel. Works on mortals and immortals both.”
I thought about what Chiron had told me when I started my quest-that a hero should never harm
mortals unless absolutely necessary.
“I didn’t know they could make weapons like that.”
“They probably can’t,” Luke agreed. “It’s one of a kind.”
He gave me a tiny smile, then slid the sword into its scabbard. “Listen, I was going to come
looking for you. What do you say we go down to the woods one last time, look for something to
fight?”
I don’t know why I hesitated. I should’ve felt relieved that Luke was being so friendly. Ever since
I’d gotten back from the quest, he’d been acting a little distant. I was afraid he might resent me for all
the attention I’d gotten.
“You think it’s a good idea?” I asked. “I mean-“
“Aw, come on.” He rummaged in his gym bag and pulled out a six-pack of Cokes. “Drinks are on
me.”
I stared at the Cokes, wondering where the heck he’d gotten them. There were no regular mortal

“We had to make Chiron think the camp wasn’t safe for you, so he would start you on your quest.
We had to confirm his fears that Hades was after you. And it worked.”
“The flying shoes were cursed,” I said. “They were supposed to drag me and the backpack into
Tartarus.”
“And they would have, if you’d been wearing them. But you gave them to the satyr, which wasn’t
part of the plan. Grover messes up everything he touches. He even confused the curse.”
Luke looked down at the scorpion, which was now sitting on my thigh. “You should have died in
Tartarus, Percy. But don’t worry, I’ll leave you with my little friend to set things right.”
“Thalia gave her life to save you,” I said, gritting my teeth. “And this is how you repay her?”
“Don’t speak of Thalia!” he shouted. “The gods let her die! That’s one of the many things they
will pay for.”
“You’re being used, Luke. You and Ares both. Don’t listen to Kronos.”
“I’ve been used?” Luke’s voice turned shrill. “Look at yourself. What has your dad ever done for
you? Kronos will rise. You’ve only delayed his plans. He will cast the Olympians into Tartarus and
drive humanity back to their caves. All except the strongest-the ones who serve him.”
“Call off the bug,” I said. “If you’re so strong, fight me yourself”
Luke smiled. “Nice try, Percy. But I’m not Ares. You can’t bait me. My lord is waiting, and he’s
got plenty of quests for me to undertake.”
“Luke-“
“Good-bye, Percy. There is a new Golden Age coming. You won’t be part of it.”
He slashed his sword in an arc and disappeared in a ripple of darkness.
The scorpion lunged.
I swatted it away with my hand and uncapped my sword. The thing jumped at me and I cut it in
half in midair.
I was about to congratulate myself until I looked down at my hand. My palm had a huge red welt,
oozing and smoking with yellow guck. The thing had gotten me after all.
My ears pounded. My vision went foggy. The water, I thought. It healed me before.
I stumbled to the creek and submerged my hand, but nothing seemed to happen. The poison was
too strong. My vision was getting dark. I could barely stand up.
Sixty seconds, Luke had told me.
I had to get back to camp. If I collapsed out here, my body would be dinner for a monster. Nobody
would ever know what had happened.
My legs felt like lead. My forehead was burning. I stumbled toward the camp, and the nymphs
stirred from their trees.
“Help,” I croaked. “Please …”
Two of them took my arms, pulling me along. I remember making it to the clearing, a counselor
shouting for help, a centaur blowing a conch horn.
Then everything went black.
***
I woke with a drinking straw in my mouth. I was sipping something that tasted like liquid
chocolate-chip cookies. Nectar.
I opened my eyes.
I was propped up in bed in the sickroom of the Big House, my right hand bandaged like a club.
Argus stood guard in the corner. Annabeth sat next to me, holding my nectar glass and dabbing a
washcloth on my forehead.

“Here we are again,” I said.
“You idiot,” Annabeth said, which is how I knew she was overjoyed to see me conscious. “You
were green and turning gray when we found you. If it weren’t for Chiron’s healing …”
“Now, now,” Chiron’s voice said. “Percy’s constitution deserves some of the credit.”
He was sitting near the foot of my bed in human form, which was why I hadn’t noticed him yet.
His lower half was magically compacted into the wheelchair, his upper half dressed in a coat and tie.
He smiled, but his face looked weary and pale, the way it did when he’d been up all night grading
Latin papers.
“How are you feeling?” he asked.
“Like my insides have been frozen, then microwaved.”
“Apt, considering that was pit scorpion venom. Now you must tell me, if you can, exactly what
happened.”
Between sips of nectar, I told them the story.
The room was quiet for a long time.
“I can’t believe that Luke …” Annabeth’s voice faltered. Her expression turned angry and sad.
“Yes. Yes, I can believe it. May the gods curse him…. He was never the same after his quest.”
“This must be reported to Olympus,” Chiron murmured. “I will go at once.”
“Luke is out there right now,” I said. “I have to go after him.”
Chiron shook his head. “No, Percy. The gods-“
“Won’t even talk about Kronos,” I snapped. “Zeus declared the matter closed!”
“Percy, I know this is hard. But you must not rush out for vengeance. You aren’t ready.”
I didn’t like it, but part of me suspected Chiron was right. One look at my hand, and I knew I
wasn’t going to be sword fighting any time soon. “Chiron … your prophecy from the Oracle … it was
about Kronos, wasn’t it? Was I in it? And Annabeth?”
Chiron glanced nervously at the ceiling. “Percy, it isn’t my place-“
“You’ve been ordered not to talk to me about it, haven’t you?”
His eyes were sympathetic, but sad. “You will be a great hero, child. I will do my best to prepare
you. But if I’m right about the path ahead of you …”
Thunder boomed overhead, rattling the windows.
“All right!” Chiron shouted. “Fine!”
He sighed in frustration. “The gods have their reasons, Percy. Knowing too much of your future is
never a good thing.”
“We can’t just sit back and do nothing,” I said.
“We will not sit back,” Chiron promised. “But you must be careful. Kronos wants you to come
unraveled. He wants your life disrupted, your thoughts clouded with fear and anger. Do not give him
what he wants. Train patiently. Your time will come.”
“Assuming I live that long.”
Chiron put his hand on my ankle. “You’ll have to trust me, Percy. You will live. But first you must
decide your path for the coming year. I cannot tell you the right choice….” I got the feeling that he had
a very definite opinion, and it was taking all his willpower not to advise me. “But you must decide
whether to stay at Camp Half-Blood year-round, or return to the mortal world for seventh grade and
be a summer camper. Think on that. When I get back from Olympus, you must tell me your decision.”
I wanted to protest. I wanted to ask him more questions. But his expression told me there could be
no more discussion; he had said as much as he could.
“I’ll be back as soon as I can,” Chiron promised. “Argus will watch over you.”

He glanced at Annabeth. “Oh, and, my dear … whenever you’re ready, they’re here.”
“Who’s here?” I asked.
Nobody answered.
Chiron rolled himself out of the room. I heard the wheels of his chair clunk carefully down the
front steps, two at a time.
Annabeth studied the ice in my drink.
“What’s wrong?” I asked her.
“Nothing.” She set the glass on the table. “I … just took your advice about something. You … um
… need anything?”
“Yeah. Help me up. I want to go outside.”
“Percy, that isn’t a good idea.”
I slid my legs out of bed. Annabeth caught me before I could crumple to the floor. A wave of
nausea rolled over me.
Annabeth said, “I told you …”
“I’m fine,” I insisted. I didn’t want to lie in bed like an invalid while Luke was out there planning
to destroy the Western world.
I managed a step forward. Then another, still leaning heavily on Annabeth. Argus followed us
outside, but he kept his distance.
By the time we reached the porch, my face was beaded with sweat. My stomach had twisted into
knots. But I had managed to make it all the way to the railing.
It was dusk. The camp looked completely deserted. The cabins were dark and the volleyball pit
silent. No canoes cut the surface of the lake. Beyond the woods and the strawberry fields, the Long
Island Sound glittered in the last light of the sun.
“What are you going to do?” Annabeth asked me.
“I don’t know.”
I told her I got the feeling Chiron wanted me to stay year-round, to put in more individual training
time, but I wasn’t sure that’s what I wanted. I admitted I’d feel bad about leaving her alone, though,
with only Clarisse for company….
Annabeth pursed her lips, then said quietly, “I’m going home for the year, Percy.”
I stared at her. “You mean, to your dad’s?”
She pointed toward the crest of Half-Blood Hill. Next to Thalia’s pine tree, at the very edge of
the camp’s magical boundaries, a family stood silhouetted-two little children, a woman, and a tall
man with blond hair. They seemed to be waiting. The man was holding a backpack that looked like
the one Annabeth had gotten from Waterland in Denver.
“I wrote him a letter when we got back,” Annabeth said. “Just like you suggested. I told him … I
was sorry. I’d come home for the school year if he still wanted me. He wrote back immediately. We
decided … we’d give it another try.”
“That took guts.”
She pursed her lips. “You won’t try anything stupid during the school year, will you? At least …
not without sending me an Iris-message?”
I managed a smile. “I won’t go looking for trouble. I usually don’t have to.”
“When I get back next summer,” she said, “we’ll hunt down Luke. We’ll ask for a quest, but if we
don’t get approval, we’ll sneak off and do it anyway. Agreed?”
“Sounds like a plan worthy of Athena.”
She held out her hand. I shook it.

