me, sizing me up. I knew this routine. I’d gone through it at enough schools.
“Well?” Annabeth prompted. “Go on.”
So naturally I tripped coming in the door and made a total fool of myself. There were some
snickers from the campers, but none of them said anything.
Annabeth announced, “Percy Jackson, meet cabin eleven.
“Regular or undetermined?” somebody asked.
I didn’t know what to say, but Annabeth said, “Undetermined.”
Everybody groaned.
A guy who was a little older than the rest came forward. “Now, now, campers. That’s what we’re
here for. Welcome, Percy. You can have that spot on the floor, right over there.”
The guy was about nineteen, and he looked pretty cool. He was tall and muscular, with shortcropped sandy hair and a friendly smile. He wore an orange tank top, cutoffs, sandals, and a leather
necklace with five different-colored clay beads. The only thing unsettling about his appearance was a
thick white scar that ran from just beneath his right eye to his jaw, like an old knife slash.
“This is Luke,” Annabeth said, and her voice sounded different somehow. I glanced over and
could’ve sworn she was blushing. She saw me looking, and her expression hardened again. “He’s
your counselor for now.”
“For now?” I asked.
“You’re undetermined,” Luke explained patiently. “They don’t know what cabin to put you in, so
you’re here. Cabin eleven takes all newcomers, all visitors. Naturally, we would. Hermes, our
patron, is the god of travelers.”
I looked at the tiny section of floor they’d given me. I had nothing to put there to mark it as my
own, no luggage, no clothes, no sleeping bag. Just the Minotaur’s horn. I thought about setting that
down, but then I remembered that Hermes was also the god of thieves.
I looked around at the campers’ faces, some sullen and suspicious, some grinning stupidly, some
eyeing me as if they were waiting for a chance to pick my pockets.
“How long will I be here?” I asked.
“Good question,” Luke said. “Until you’re determined.”
“How long will that take?”
The campers all laughed.
“Come on,” Annabeth told me. “I’ll show you the volleyball court.”
“I’ve already seen it.”
“Come on.” She grabbed my wrist and dragged me outside. I could hear the kids of cabin eleven
laughing behind me.
When we were a few feet away, Annabeth said, “Jackson, you have to do better than that.”
“What?”
She rolled her eyes and mumbled under her breath, “I can’t believe I thought you were the one.”
“What’s your problem?” I was getting angry now. “All I know is, I kill some bull guy-“
“Don’t talk like that!” Annabeth told me. “You know how many kids at this camp wish they’d had
your chance?”
“To get killed?”
“To fight the Minotaur! What do you think we train for?”
I shook my head. “Look, if the thing I fought really was the Minotaur, the same one in the stories
…”
“Yes.”

Annabeth shook her head. “Not unless they’re intentionally stocked in the woods or specially
summoned by somebody on the inside.”
“Why would anybody want to summon a monster?”
“Practice fights. Practical jokes.”
“Practical jokes?”
“The point is, the borders are sealed to keep mortals and monsters out. From the outside, mortals
look into the valley and see nothing unusual, just a strawberry farm.”
“So … you’re a year-rounder?”
Annabeth nodded. From under the collar of her T-shirt she pulled a leather necklace with five
clay beads of different colors. It was just like Luke’s, except Annabeth’s also had a big gold ring
strung on it, like a college ring.
“I’ve been here since I was seven,” she said. “Every August, on the last day of summer session,
you get a bead for surviving another year. I’ve been here longer than most of the counselors, and
they’re all in college.”
“Why did you come so young?”
She twisted the ring on her necklace. “None of your business.”
“Oh.” I stood there for a minute in uncomfortable silence. “So … I could just walk out of here
right now if I wanted to?”
“It would be suicide, but you could, with Mr. D’s or Chiron’s permission. But they wouldn’t give
permission until the end of the summer session unless …”
“Unless?”
“You were granted a quest. But that hardly ever happens. The last time …”
Her voice trailed off. I could tell from her tone that the last time hadn’t gone well.
“Back in the sick room,” I said, “when you were feeding me that stuff-“
“Ambrosia.”
“Yeah. You asked me something about the summer solstice.”
Annabeth’s shoulders tensed. “So you do know something?”
“Well… no. Back at my old school, I overheard Grover and Chiron talking about it. Grover
mentioned the summer solstice. He said something like we didn’t have much time, because of the
deadline. What did that mean?”
She clenched her fists. “I wish I knew. Chiron and the satyrs, they know, but they won’t tell me.
Something is wrong in Olympus, something pretty major. Last time I was there, everything seemed so
normal.”
“You’ve been to Olympus?”
“Some of us year-rounders-Luke and Clarisse and I and a few others-we took a field trip during
winter solstice. That’s when the gods have their big annual council.”
“But… how did you get there?”
“The Long Island Railroad, of course. You get off at Penn Station. Empire State Building, special
elevator to the six hundredth floor.” She looked at me like she was sure I must know this already.
“You are a New Yorker, right?”
“Oh, sure.” As far as I knew, there were only a hundred and two floors in the Empire State
Building, but I decided not to point that out.
“Right after we visited,” Annabeth continued, “the weather got weird, as if the gods had started
fighting. A couple of times since, I’ve overheard satyrs talking. The best I can figure out is that
something important was stolen. And if it isn’t returned by summer solstice, there’s going to be

trouble. When you came, I was hoping … I mean- Athena can get along with just about anybody,
except for Ares. And of course she’s got the rivalry with Poseidon. But, I mean, aside from that, I
thought we could work together. I thought you might know something.”
I shook my head. I wished I could help her, but I felt too hungry and tired and mentally overloaded
to ask any more questions.
“I’ve got to get a quest,” Annabeth muttered to herself. “I’m not too young. If they would just tell
me the problem …”
I could smell barbecue smoke coming from somewhere nearby. Annabeth must’ve heard my
stomach growl. She told me to go on, she’d catch me later. I left her on the pier, tracing her finger
across the rail as if drawing a battle plan.
Back at cabin eleven, everybody was talking and horsing around, waiting for dinner. For the first
time, I noticed that a lot of the campers had similar features: sharp noses, upturned eyebrows,
mischievous smiles. They were the kind of kids that teachers would peg as troublemakers. Thankfully,
nobody paid much attention to me as I walked over to my spot on the floor and plopped down with my
minotaur horn.
The counselor, Luke, came over. He had the Hermes family resemblance, too. It was marred by
that scar on his right cheek, but his smile was intact.
“Found you a sleeping bag,” he said. “And here, I stole you some toiletries from the camp store.”
I couldn’t tell if he was kidding about the stealing part.
I said, “Thanks.”
“No prob.” Luke sat next to me, pushed his back against the wall. “Tough first day?”
“I don’t belong here,” I said. “I don’t even believe in gods.”
“Yeah,” he said. “That’s how we all started. Once you start believing in them? It doesn’t get any
easier.”
The bitterness in his voice surprised me, because Luke seemed like a pretty easygoing guy. He
looked like he could handle just about anything.
“So your dad is Hermes?” I asked.
He pulled a switchblade out of his back pocket, and for a second I thought he was going to gut me,
but he just scraped the mud off the sole of his sandal. “Yeah. Hermes.”
“The wing-footed messenger guy.”
“That’s him. Messengers. Medicine. Travelers, merchants, thieves. Anybody who uses the roads.
That’s why you’re here, enjoying cabin eleven’s hospitality. Hermes isn’t picky about who he
sponsors.”
I figured Luke didn’t mean to call me a nobody. He just had a lot on his mind.
“You ever meet your dad?” I asked.
“Once.”
I waited, thinking that if he wanted to tell me, he’d tell me. Apparently, he didn’t. I wondered if
the story had anything to do with how he got his scar.
Luke looked up and managed a smile. “Don’t worry about it, Percy. The campers here, they’re
mostly good people. After all, we’re extended family, right? We take care of each other.”
He seemed to understand how lost I felt, and I was grateful for that, because an older guy like
him-even if he was a counselor-should’ve steered clear of an uncool middle-schooler like me. But
Luke had welcomed me into the cabin. He’d even stolen me some toiletries, which was the nicest
thing anybody had done for me all day.
I decided to ask him my last big question, the one that had been bothering me all afternoon.

“Clarisse, from Ares, was joking about me being ‘Big Three’ material. Then Annabeth … twice, she
said I might be ‘the one.’ She said I should talk to the Oracle. What was that all about?”
Luke folded his knife. “I hate prophecies.”
“What do you mean?”
His face twitched around the scar. “Let’s just say I messed things up for everybody else. The last
two years, ever since my trip to the Garden of the Hesperides went sour, Chiron hasn’t allowed any
more quests. Annabeth’s been dying to get out into the world. She pestered Chiron so much he finally
told her he already knew her fate. He’d had a prophecy from the Oracle. He wouldn’t tell her the
whole thing, but he said Annabeth wasn’t destined to go on a quest yet. She had to wait until…
somebody special came to the camp.”
“Somebody special?”
“Don’t worry about it, kid,” Luke said. “Annabeth wants to think every new camper who comes
through here is the omen she’s been waiting for. Now, come on, it’s dinnertime.”
The moment he said it, a horn blew in the distance. Somehow, I knew it was a conch shell, even
though I’d never heard one before.
Luke yelled, “Eleven, fall in!”
The whole cabin, about twenty of us, filed into the commons yard. We lined up in order of
seniority, so of course I was dead last. Campers came from the other cabins, too, except for the three
empty cabins at the end, and cabin eight, which had looked normal in the daytime, but was now
starting to glow silver as the sun went down.
We marched up the hill to the mess hall pavilion. Satyrs joined us from the meadow. Naiads
emerged from the canoeing lake. A few other girls came out of the woods- and when I say out of the
woods, I mean straight out of the woods. I saw one girl, about nine or ten years old, melt from the
side of a maple tree and come skipping up the hill.
In all, there were maybe a hundred campers, a few dozen satyrs, and a dozen assorted wood
nymphs and naiads.
At the pavilion, torches blazed around the marble columns. A central fire burned in a bronze
brazier the size of a bathtub. Each cabin had its own table, covered in white cloth trimmed in purple.
Four of the tables were empty, but cabin eleven’s was way overcrowded. I had to squeeze on to the
edge of a bench with half my butt hanging off.
I saw Grover sitting at table twelve with Mr. D, a few satyrs, and a couple of plump blond boys
who looked just like Mr. D. Chiron stood to one side, the picnic table being way too small for a
centaur.
Annabeth sat at table six with a bunch of serious-looking athletic kids, all with her gray eyes and
honey-blond hair.
Clarisse sat behind me at Ares’s table. She’d apparently gotten over being hosed down, because
she was laughing and belching right alongside her friends.
Finally, Chiron pounded his hoof against the marble floor of the pavilion, and everybody fell
silent. He raised a glass. “To the gods!”
Everybody else raised their glasses. “To the gods!”
Wood nymphs came forward with platters of food: grapes, apples, strawberries, cheese, fresh
bread, and yes, barbecue! My glass was empty, but Luke said, “Speak to it. Whatever you wantnonalcoholic, of course.”
I said, “Cherry Coke.”
The glass filled with sparkling caramel liquid.

Then I had an idea. “Blue Cherry Coke.”
The soda turned a violent shade of cobalt.
I took a cautious sip. Perfect.
I drank a toast to my mother.
She’s not gone, I told myself. Not permanently, anyway. She’s in the Underworld. And if that’s a
real place, then someday…
“Here you go, Percy,” Luke said, handing me a platter of smoked brisket.
I loaded my plate and was about to take a big bite when I noticed everybody getting up, carrying
their plates toward the fire in the center of the pavilion. I wondered if they were going for dessert or
something.
“Come on,” Luke told me.
As I got closer, I saw that everyone was taking a portion of their meal and dropping it into the
fire, the ripest strawberry, the juiciest slice of beef, the warmest, most buttery roll.
Luke murmured in my ear, “Burnt offerings for the gods. They like the smell.”
“You’re kidding.”
His look warned me not to take this lightly, but I couldn’t help wondering why an immortal, allpowerful being would like the smell of burning food.
Luke approached the fire, bowed his head, and tossed in a cluster of fat red grapes. “Hermes.”
I was next.
I wished I knew what god’s name to say.
Finally, I made a silent plea. Whoever you are, tell me. Please.
I scraped a big slice of brisket into the flames.
When I caught a whiff of the smoke, I didn’t gag.
It smelled nothing like burning food. It smelled of hot chocolate and fresh-baked brownies,
hamburgers on the grill and wildflowers, and a hundred other good things that shouldn’t have gone
well together, but did. I could almost believe the gods could live off that smoke.
When everybody had returned to their seats and finished eating their meals, Chiron pounded his
hoof again for our attention.
Mr. D got up with a huge sigh. “Yes, I suppose I’d better say hello to all you brats. Well, hello.
Our activities director, Chiron, says the next capture the flag is Friday. Cabin five presently holds the
laurels.”
A bunch of ugly cheering rose from the Ares table.
“Personally,” Mr. D continued, “I couldn’t care less, but congratulations. Also, I should tell you
that we have a new camper today. Peter Johnson.”
Chiron murmured something.
“Er, Percy Jackson,” Mr. D corrected. “That’s right. Hurrah, and all that. Now run along to your
silly campfire. Go on.”
Everybody cheered. We all headed down toward the amphitheater, where Apollo’s cabin led a
sing-along. We sang camp songs about the gods and ate s’mores and joked around, and the funny thing
was, I didn’t feel that anyone was staring at me anymore. I felt that I was home.
Later in the evening, when the sparks from the campfire were curling into a starry sky, the conch
horn blew again, and we all filed back to our cabins. I didn’t realize how exhausted I was until I
collapsed on my borrowed sleeping bag.
My fingers curled around the Minotaur’s horn. I thought about my mom, but I had good thoughts:
her smile, the bedtime stories she would read me when I was a kid, the way she would tell me not to

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
8 WE CAPTURE
A FLAG
The next few days I settled into a routine that felt almost normal, if you don’t count the fact that I
was getting lessons from satyrs, nymphs, and a centaur.
Each morning I took Ancient Greek from Annabeth, and we talked about the gods and goddesses
in the present tense, which was kind of weird. I discovered Annabeth was right about my dyslexia:
Ancient Greek wasn’t that hard for me to read. At least, no harder than English. After a couple of
mornings, I could stumble through a few lines of Homer without too much headache.
The rest of the day, I’d rotate through outdoor activities, looking for something I was good at.
Chiron tried to teach me archery, but we found out pretty quick I wasn’t any good with a bow and
arrow. He didn’t complain, even when he had to desnag a stray arrow out of his tail.
Foot racing? No good either. The wood-nymph instructors left me in the dust. They told me not to
worry about it. They’d had centuries of practice running away from lovesick gods. But still, it was a
little humiliating to be slower than a tree.
And wrestling? Forget it. Every time I got on the mat, Clarisse would pulverize me.
“There’s more where that came from, punk,” she’d mumble in my ear.
The only thing I really excelled at was canoeing, and that wasn’t the kind of heroic skill people
expected to see from the kid who had beaten the Minotaur.
I knew the senior campers and counselors were watching me, trying to decide who my dad was,
but they weren’t having an easy time of it. I wasn’t as strong as the Ares kids, or as good at archery as
the Apollo kids. I didn’t have Hephaestus’s skill with metalwork or-gods forbid- Dionysus’s way
with vine plants. Luke told me I might be a child of Hermes, a kind of jack-of-all-trades, master of
none. But I got the feeling he was just trying to make me feel better. He really didn’t know what to
make of me either.
Despite all that, I liked camp. I got used to the morning fog over the beach, the smell of hot
strawberry fields in the afternoon, even the weird noises of monsters in the woods at night. I would
eat dinner with cabin eleven, scrape part of my meal into the fire, and try to feel some connection to
my real dad. Nothing came. Just that warm feeling I’d always had, like the memory of his smile. I
tried not to think too much about my mom, but I kept wondering: if gods and monsters were real, if all
this magical stuff was possible, surely there was some way to save her, to bring her back….
I started to understand Luke’s bitterness and how he seemed to resent his father, Hermes. So okay,
maybe gods had important things to do. But couldn’t they call once in a while, or thunder, or
something? Dionysus could make Diet Coke appear out of thin air. Why couldn’t my dad, whoever he
was, make a phone appear?
Thursday afternoon, three days after I’d arrived at Camp Half-Blood, I had my first swordfighting lesson. Everybody from cabin eleven gathered in the big circular arena, where Luke would be
our instructor.
We started with basic stabbing and slashing, using some straw-stuffed dummies in Greek armor. I
guess I did okay. At least, I understood what I was supposed to do and my reflexes were good.
The problem was, I couldn’t find a blade that felt right in my hands. Either they were too heavy,

or too light, or too long. Luke tried his best to fix me up, but he agreed that none of the practice blades
seemed to work for me.
We moved on to dueling in pairs. Luke announced he would be my partner, since this was my first
time.
“Good luck,” one of the campers told me. “Luke’s the best swordsman in the last three hundred
years.”
“Maybe he’ll go easy on me,” I said.
The camper snorted.
Luke showed me thrusts and parries and shield blocks the hard way. With every swipe, I got a
little more battered and bruised. “Keep your guard up, Percy,” he’d say, then whap me in the ribs
with the flat of his blade. “No, not that far up!” Whap! “Lunge!” Whap! “Now, back!” Whap!
By the time he called a break, I was soaked in sweat. Everybody swarmed the drinks cooler. Luke
poured ice water on his head, which looked like such a good idea, I did the same.
Instantly, I felt better. Strength surged back into my arms. The sword didn’t feel so awkward.
“Okay, everybody circle up!” Luke ordered. “If Percy doesn’t mind, I want to give you a little
demo.”
Great, I thought. Let’s all watch Percy get pounded.
The Hermes guys gathered around. They were suppressing smiles. I figured they’d been in my
shoes before and couldn’t wait to see how Luke used me for a punching bag. He told everybody he
was going to demonstrate a disarming technique: how to twist the enemy’s blade with the flat of your
own sword so that he had no choice but to drop his weapon.
“This is difficult,” he stressed. “I’ve had it used against me. No laughing at Percy, now. Most
swordsmen have to work years to master this technique.”
He demonstrated the move on me in slow motion. Sure enough, the sword clattered out of my
hand.
“Now in real time,” he said, after I’d retrieved my weapon. “We keep sparring until one of us
pulls it off. Ready, Percy?”
I nodded, and Luke came after me. Somehow, I kept him from getting a shot at the hilt of my
sword. My senses opened up. I saw his attacks coming. I countered. I stepped forward and tried a
thrust of my own. Luke deflected it easily, but I saw a change in his face. His eyes narrowed, and he
started to press me with more force.
The sword grew heavy in my hand. The balance wasn’t right. I knew it was only a matter of
seconds before Luke took me down, so I figured, What the heck?
I tried the disarming maneuver.
My blade hit the base of Luke’s and I twisted, putting my whole weight into a downward thrust.
Clang.
Luke’s sword rattled against the stones. The tip of my blade was an inch from his undefended
chest.
The other campers were silent.
I lowered my sword. “Um, sorry.”
For a moment, Luke was too stunned to speak.
“Sorry?” His scarred face broke into a grin. “By the gods, Percy, why are you sorry? Show me
that again!”
I didn’t want to. The short burst of manic energy had completely abandoned me. But Luke insisted.
This time, there was no contest. The moment our swords connected, Luke hit my hilt and sent my

weapon skidding across the floor.
After a long pause, somebody in the audience said, “Beginner’s luck?”
Luke wiped the sweat off his brow. He appraised at me with an entirely new interest. “Maybe,”
he said. “But I wonder what Percy could do with a balanced sword… .”
Friday afternoon, I was sitting with Grover at the lake, resting from a near-death experience on
the climbing wall. Grover had scampered to the top like a mountain goat, but the lava had almost
gotten me. My shirt had smoking holes in it. The hairs had been singed off my forearms.
We sat on the pier, watching the naiads do underwater basket-weaving, until I got up the nerve to
ask Grover how his conversation had gone with Mr. D.
His face turned a sickly shade of yellow.
“Fine,” he said. “Just great.”
“So your career’s still on track?”
He glanced at me nervously. “Chiron t-told you I want a searcher’s license?”
“Well… no.” I had no idea what a searcher’s license was, but it didn’t seem like the right time to
ask. “He just said you had big plans, you know … and that you needed credit for completing a
keeper’s assignment. So did you get it?”
Grover looked down at the naiads. “Mr. D suspended judgment. He said I hadn’t failed or
succeeded with you yet, so our fates were still tied together. If you got a quest and I went along to
protect you, and we both came back alive, then maybe he’d consider the job complete.”
My spirits lifted. “Well, that’s not so bad, right?”
“Blaa-ha-ha! He might as well have transferred me to stable-cleaning duty. The chances of you
getting a quest… and even if you did, why would you want me along?”
“Of course I’d want you along!”
Grover stared glumly into the water. “Basket-weaving … Must be nice to have a useful skill.”
I tried to reassure him that he had lots of talents, but that just made him look more miserable. We
talked about canoeing and swordplay for a while, then debated the pros and cons of the different
gods. Finally, I asked him about the four empty cabins.
“Number eight, the silver one, belongs to Artemis,” he said. “She vowed to be a maiden forever.
So of course, no kids. The cabin is, you know, honorary. If she didn’t have one, she’d be mad.”
“Yeah, okay. But the other three, the ones at the end. Are those the Big Three?”
Grover tensed. We were getting close to a touchy subject. “No. One of them, number two, is
Hera’s,” he said. “That’s another honorary thing. She’s the goddess of marriage, so of course she
wouldn’t go around having affairs with mortals. That’s her husband’s job. When we say the Big
Three, we mean the three powerful brothers, the sons of Kronos.”
“Zeus, Poseidon, Hades.”
“Right. You know. After the great battle with the Titans, they took over the world from their dad
and drew lots to decide who got what.”
“Zeus got the sky,” I remembered. “Poseidon the sea, Hades the Underworld.”
“Uh-huh.”
“But Hades doesn’t have a cabin here.”
“No. He doesn’t have a throne on Olympus, either. He sort of does his own thing down in the
Underworld. If he did have a cabin here …” Grover shuddered. “Well, it wouldn’t be pleasant. Let’s
leave it at that.”
“But Zeus and Poseidon-they both had, like, a bazillion kids in the myths. Why are their cabins
empty?”

worry, okay?”
I got the idea he was reassuring himself more than me.
That night after dinner, there was a lot more excitement than usual.
At last, it was time for capture the flag.
When the plates were cleared away, the conch horn sounded and we all stood at our tables.
Campers yelled and cheered as Annabeth and two of her siblings ran into the pavilion carrying a
silk banner. It was about ten feet long, glistening gray, with a painting of a barn owl above an olive
tree. From the opposite side of the pavilion, Clarisse and her buddies ran in with another banner, of
identical size, but gaudy red, painted with a bloody spear and a boar’s head.
I turned to Luke and yelled over the noise, “Those are the flags?”
“Yeah.”
“Ares and Athena always lead the teams?”
“Not always,” he said. “But often.”
“So, if another cabin captures one, what do you do- repaint the flag?”
He grinned. “You’ll see. First we have to get one.”
“Whose side are we on?”
He gave me a sly look, as if he knew something I didn’t. The scar on his face made him look
almost evil in the torchlight. “We’ve made a temporary alliance with Athena. Tonight, we get the flag
from Ares. And you are going to help.”
The teams were announced. Athena had made an alliance with Apollo and Hermes, the two
biggest cabins. Apparently, privileges had been traded-shower times, chore schedules, the best slots
for activities-in order to win support.
Ares had allied themselves with everybody else: Dionysus, Demeter, Aphrodite, and Hephaestus.
From what I’d seen, Dionysus’s kids were actually good athletes, but there were only two of them.
Demeter’s kids had the edge with nature skills and outdoor stuff but they weren’t very aggressive.
Aphrodite’s sons and daughters I wasn’t too worried about. They mostly sat out every activity and
checked their reflections in the lake and did their hair and gossiped. Hephaestus’s kids weren’t pretty,
and there were only four of them, but they were big and burly from working in the metal shop all day.
They might be a problem. That, of course, left Ares’s cabin: a dozen of the biggest, ugliest, meanest
kids on Long Island, or anywhere else on the planet.
Chiron hammered his hoof on the marble.
“Heroes!” he announced. “You know the rules. The creek is the boundary line. The entire forest is
fair game. All magic items are allowed. The banner must be prominently displayed, and have no more
than two guards. Prisoners may be disarmed, but may not be bound or gagged. No killing or maiming
is allowed. I will serve as referee and battlefield medic. Arm yourselves!”
He spread his hands, and the tables were suddenly covered with equipment: helmets, bronze
swords, spears, oxhide shields coated in metal.
“Whoa,” I said. “We’re really supposed to use these?”
Luke looked at me as if I were crazy. “Unless you want to get skewered by your friends in cabin
five. Here-Chiron thought these would fit. You’ll be on border patrol.”
My shield was the size of an NBA backboard, with a big caduceus in the middle. It weighed about
a million pounds. I could have snowboarded on it fine, but I hoped nobody seriously expected me to
run fast. My helmet, like all the helmets on Athena’s side, had a blue horsehair plume on top. Ares
and their allies had red plumes.
Annabeth yelled, “Blue team, forward!”

We cheered and shook our swords and followed her down the path to the south woods. The red
team yelled taunts at us as they headed off toward the north.
I managed to catch up with Annabeth without tripping over my equipment. “Hey.”
She kept marching.
“So what’s the plan?” I asked. “Got any magic items you can loan me?”
Her hand drifted toward her pocket, as if she were afraid I’d stolen something.
“Just watch Clarisse’s spear,” she said. “You don’t want that thing touching you. Otherwise, don’t
worry. We’ll take the banner from Ares. Has Luke given you your job?”
“Border patrol, whatever that means.”
“It’s easy. Stand by the creek, keep the reds away. Leave the rest to me. Athena always has a
plan.”
She pushed ahead, leaving me in the dust.
“Okay,” I mumbled. “Glad you wanted me on your team.”
It was a warm, sticky night. The woods were dark, with fireflies popping in and out of view.
Annabeth stationed me next to a little creek that gurgled over some rocks, then she and the rest of the
team scattered into the trees.
Standing there alone, with my big blue-feathered helmet and my huge shield, I felt like an idiot.
The bronze sword, like all the swords I’d tried so far, seemed balanced wrong. The leather grip
pulled on my hand like a bowling ball.
There was no way anybody would actually attack me, would they? I mean, Olympus had to have
liability issues, right?
Far away, the conch horn blew. I heard whoops and yells in the woods, the clanking of metal, kids
fighting. A blue-plumed ally from Apollo raced past me like a deer, leaped through the creek, and
disappeared into enemy territory.
Great, I thought. I’ll miss all the fun, as usual.
Then I heard a sound that sent a chill up my spine, a low canine growl, somewhere close by.
I raised my shield instinctively; I had the feeling something was stalking me.
Then the growling stopped. I felt the presence retreating.
On the other side of the creek, the underbrush exploded. Five Ares warriors came yelling and
screaming out of the dark.
“Cream the punk!” Clarisse screamed.
Her ugly pig eyes glared through the slits of her helmet. She brandished a five-foot-long spear, its
barbed metal tip flickering with red light. Her siblings had only the standard-issue bronze swords-not
that that made me feel any better.
They charged across the stream. There was no help in sight. I could run. Or I could defend myself
against half the Ares cabin.
I managed to sidestep the first kid’s swing, but these guys were not as stupid the Minotaur. They
surrounded me, and Clarisse thrust at me with her spear. My shield deflected the point, but I felt a
painful tingling all over my body. My hair stood on end. My shield arm went numb, and the air
burned.
Electricity. Her stupid spear was electric. I fell back.
Another Ares guy slammed me in the chest with the butt of his sword and I hit the dirt.
They could’ve kicked me into jelly, but they were too busy laughing.
“Give him a haircut,” Clarisse said. “Grab his hair.”
I managed to get to my feet. I raised my sword, but Clarisse slammed it aside with her spear as

sparks flew. Now both my arms felt numb.
“Oh, wow,” Clarisse said. “I’m scared of this guy. Really scared.”
“The flag is that way,” I told her. I wanted to sound angry, but I was afraid it didn’t come out that
way.
“Yeah,” one of her siblings said. “But see, we don’t care about the flag. We care about a guy who
made our cabin look stupid.”
“You do that without my help,” I told them. It probably wasn’t the smartest thing to say.
Two of them came at me. I backed up toward the creek, tried to raise my shield, but Clarisse was
too fast. Her spear stuck me straight in the ribs. If I hadn’t been wearing an armored breastplate, I
would’ve been shish-ke-babbed. As it was, the electric point just about shocked my teeth out of my
mouth. One of her cabinmates slashed his sword across my arm, leaving a good-size cut.
Seeing my own blood made me dizzy-warm and cold at the same time.
“No maiming,” I managed to say.
“Oops,” the guy said. “Guess I lost my dessert privilege.
He pushed me into the creek and I landed with a splash. They all laughed. I figured as soon as
they were through being amused, I would die. But then something happened. The water seemed to
wake up my senses, as if I’d just had a bag of my mom’s double-espresso jelly beans.
Clarisse and her cabinmates came into the creek to get me, but I stood to meet them. I knew what
to do. I swung the flat of my sword against the first guy’s head and knocked his helmet clean off. I hit
him so hard I could see his eyes vibrating as he crumpled into the water.
Ugly Number Two and Ugly Number Three came at me. I slammed one in the face with my shield
and used my sword to shear off the other guy’s horsehair plume. Both of them backed up quick. Ugly
Number Four didn’t look really anxious to attack, but Clarisse kept coming, the point of her spear
crackling with energy. As soon as she thrust, I caught the shaft between the edge of my shield and my
sword, and I snapped it like a twig.
“Ah!” she screamed. “You idiot! You corpse-breath worm!”
She probably would’ve said worse, but I smacked her between the eyes with my sword-butt and
sent her stumbling backward out of the creek.
Then I heard yelling, elated screams, and I saw Luke racing toward the boundary line with the red
team’s banner lifted high. He was flanked by a couple of Hermes guys covering his retreat, and a few
Apollos behind them, fighting off the Hephaestus kids. The Ares folks got up, and Clarisse muttered a
dazed curse.
“A trick!” she shouted. “It was a trick.”
They staggered after Luke, but it was too late. Everybody converged on the creek as Luke ran
across into friendly territory. Our side exploded into cheers. The red banner shimmered and turned to
silver. The boar and spear were replaced with a huge caduceus, the symbol of cabin eleven.
Everybody on the blue team picked up Luke and started carrying him around on their shoulders.
Chiron cantered out from the woods and blew the conch horn.
The game was over. We’d won.
I was about to join the celebration when Annabeth’s voice, right next to me in the creek, said,
“Not bad, hero.”
I looked, but she wasn’t there.
“Where the heck did you learn to fight like that?” she asked. The air shimmered, and she
materialized, holding a Yankees baseball cap as if she’d just taken it off her head.
I felt myself getting angry. I wasn’t even fazed by the fact that she’d just been invisible. “You set

me up,” I said. “You put me here because you knew Clarisse would come after me, while you sent
Luke around the flank. You had it all figured out.”
Annabeth shrugged. “I told you. Athena always, always has a plan.”
“A plan to get me pulverized.”
“I came as fast as I could. I was about to jump in, but …” She shrugged. “You didn’t need help.”
Then she noticed my wounded arm. “How did you do that?”
“Sword cut,” I said. “What do you think?”
“No. It was a sword cut. Look at it.”
The blood was gone. Where the huge cut had been, there was a long white scratch, and even that
was fading. As I watched, it turned into a small scar, and disappeared.
“I-I don’t get it,” I said.
Annabeth was thinking hard. I could almost see the gears turning. She looked down at my feet,
then at Clarisse’s broken spear, and said, “Step out of the water, Percy.”
“What-“
“Just do it.”
I came out of the creek and immediately felt bone tired. My arms started to go numb again. My
adrenaline rush left me. I almost fell over, but Annabeth steadied me.
“Oh, Styx,” she cursed. “This is not good. I didn’t want … I assumed it would be Zeus… .”
Before I could ask what she meant, I heard that canine growl again, but much closer than before.
A howl ripped through the forest.
The campers’ cheering died instantly. Chiron shouted something in Ancient Greek, which I would
realize, only later, I had understood perfectly: “Stand ready! My bow!”
Annabeth drew her sword.
There on the rocks just above us was a black hound the size of a rhino, with lava-red eyes and
fangs like daggers.
It was looking straight at me.
Nobody moved except Annabeth, who yelled, “Percy, run!”
She tried to step in front of me, but the hound was too fast. It leaped over her-an enormous
shadow with teeth-and just as it hit me, as I stumbled backward and felt its razor-sharp claws ripping
through my armor, there was a cascade of thwacking sounds, like forty pieces of paper being ripped
one after the other. From the hounds neck sprouted a cluster of arrows. The monster fell dead at my
feet.
By some miracle, I was still alive. I didn’t want to look underneath the ruins of my shredded
armor. My chest felt warm and wet, and I knew I was badly cut. Another second, and the monster
would’ve turned me into a hundred pounds of delicatessen meat.
Chiron trotted up next to us, a bow in his hand, his face grim.
“Di immortales!” Annabeth said. “That’s a hellhound from the Fields of Punishment. They don’t
… they’re not supposed to …”
“Someone summoned it,” Chiron said. “Someone inside the camp.”
Luke came over, the banner in his hand forgotten, his moment of glory gone.
Clarisse yelled, “It’s all Percy’s fault! Percy summoned it!”
“Be quiet, child,” Chiron told her.
We watched the body of the hellhound melt into shadow, soaking into the ground until it
disappeared.
“You’re wounded,” Annabeth told me. “Quick, Percy, get in the water.”

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
9 I AM OFFERED
A QUEST
The next morning, Chiron moved me to cabin three.
I didn’t have to share with anybody. I had plenty of room for all my stuff: the Minotaur’s horn, one
set of spare clothes, and a toiletry bag. I got to sit at my own dinner table, pick all my own activities,
call “lights out” whenever I felt like it, and not listen to anybody else.
And I was absolutely miserable.
Just when I’d started to feel accepted, to feel I had a home in cabin eleven and I might be a normal
kid-or as normal as you can be when you’re a half-blood-I’d been separated out as if I had some rare
disease.
Nobody mentioned the hellhound, but I got the feeling they were all talking about it behind my
back. The attack had scared everybody. It sent two messages: one, that I was the son of the Sea God;
and two, monsters would stop at nothing to kill me. They could even invade a camp that had always
been considered safe.
The other campers steered clear of me as much as possible. Cabin eleven was too nervous to
have sword class with me after what I’d done to the Ares folks in the woods, so my lessons with Luke
became one-on-one. He pushed me harder than ever, and wasn’t afraid to bruise me up in the process.
“You’re going to need all the training you can get,” he promised, as we were working with
swords and flaming torches. “Now let’s try that viper-beheading strike again. Fifty more repetitions.”
Annabeth still taught me Greek in the mornings, but she seemed distracted. Every time I said
something, she scowled at me, as if I’d just poked her between the eyes.
After lessons, she would walk away muttering to herself: “Quest … Poseidon? … Dirty rotten …
Got to make a plan …”
Even Clarisse kept her distance, though her venomous looks made it clear she wanted to kill me
for breaking her magic spear. I wished she would just yell or punch me or something. I’d rather get
into fights every day than be ignored.
I knew somebody at camp resented me, because one night I came into my cabin and found a mortal
newspaper dropped inside the doorway, a copy of the New York Daily News, opened to the Metro
page. The article took me almost an hour to read, because the angrier I got, the more the words floated
around on the page.
BOY AND MOTHER STILL MISSING AFTER
FREAK CAR ACCIDENT
BY EILEEN SMYTHE
Sally Jackson and son Percy are still missing one week after their mysterious disappearance. The
family’s badly burned ‘78 Camaro was discovered last Saturday on a north Long Island road with the
roof ripped off and the front axle broken. The car had flipped and skidded for several hundred feet
before exploding.
Mother and son had gone for a weekend vacation to Montauk, but left hastily, under mysterious
circumstances. Small traces of blood were found in the car and near the scene of the wreck, but there
were no other signs of the missing Jacksons. Residents in the rural area reported seeing nothing

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
10 I RUIN A PERFECTLY
GOOD BUS
It didn’t take me long to pack. I decided to leave the Minotaur horn in my cabin, which left me
only an extra change of clothes and a toothbrush to stuff in a backpack Grover had found for me.
The camp store loaned me one hundred dollars in mortal money and twenty golden drachmas.
These coins were as big as Girl Scout cookies and had images of various Greek gods stamped on one
side and the Empire State Building on the other. The ancient mortal drachmas had been silver, Chiron
told us, but Olympians never used less than pure gold. Chiron said the coins might come in handy for
non-mortal transactions-whatever that meant. He gave Annabeth and me each a canteen of nectar and
a Ziploc bag full of ambrosia squares, to be used only in emergencies, if we were seriously hurt. It
was god food, Chiron reminded us. It would cure us of almost any injury, but it was lethal to mortals.
Too much of it would make a half-blood very, very feverish. An overdose would burn us up, literally.
Annabeth was bringing her magic Yankees cap, which she told me had been a twelfth-birthday
present from her mom. She carried a book on famous classical architecture, written in Ancient Greek,
to read when she got bored, and a long bronze knife, hidden in her shirt sleeve. I was sure the knife
would get us busted the first time we went through a metal detector.
Grover wore his fake feet and his pants to pass as human. He wore a green rasta-style cap,
because when it rained his curly hair flattened and you could just see the tips of his horns. His bright
orange backpack was full of scrap metal and apples to snack on. In his pocket was a set of reed pipes
his daddy goat had carved for him, even though he only knew two songs: Mozart’s Piano Concerto no.
12 and Hilary Duff’s “So Yesterday,” both of which sounded pretty bad on reed pipes.
We waved good-bye to the other campers, took one last look at the strawberry fields, the ocean,
and the Big House, then hiked up Half-Blood Hill to the tall pine tree that used to be Thalia, daughter
of Zeus.
Chiron was waiting for us in his wheelchair. Next to him stood the surfer dude I’d seen when I
was recovering in the sick room. According to Grover, the guy was the camp’s head of security. He
supposedly had eyes all over his body so he could never be surprised. Today, though, he was wearing
a chauffeur’s uniform, so I could only see extra peepers on his hands, face and neck.
“This is Argus,” Chiron told me. “He will drive you into the city, and, er, well, keep an eye on
things.”
I heard footsteps behind us.
Luke came running up the hill, carrying a pair of basketball shoes.
“Hey!” he panted. “Glad I caught you.”
Annabeth blushed, the way she always did when Luke was around.
“Just wanted to say good luck,” Luke told me. “And I thought … um, maybe you could use these.”
He handed me the sneakers, which looked pretty normal. They even smelled kind of normal.
Luke said, “Maia!”
White bird’s wings sprouted out of the heels, startling me so much, I dropped them. The shoes
flapped around on the ground until the wings folded up and disappeared.
“Awesome!” Grover said.

Luke smiled. “Those served me well when I was on my quest. Gift from Dad. Of course, I don’t
use them much these days….” His expression turned sad.
I didn’t know what to say. It was cool enough that Luke had come to say good-bye. I’d been afraid
he might resent me for getting so much attention the last few days. But here he was giving me a magic
gift…. It made me blush almost as much as Annabeth.
“Hey, man,” I said. “Thanks.”
“Listen, Percy …” Luke looked uncomfortable. “A lot of hopes are riding on you. So just … kill
some monsters for me, okay?”
We shook hands. Luke patted Grover’s head between his horns, then gave a good-bye hug to
Annabeth, who looked like she might pass out.
After Luke was gone, I told her, “You’re hyperventilating.”
“Am not.”
“You let him capture the flag instead of you, didn’t you?”
“Oh … why do I want to go anywhere with you, Percy?”
She stomped down the other side of the hill, where a white SUV waited on the shoulder of the
road. Argus followed, jingling his car keys.
I picked up the flying shoes and had a sudden bad feeling. I looked at Chiron. “I won’t be able to
use these, will I?”
He shook his head. “Luke meant well, Percy. But taking to the air … that would not be wise for
you.”
I nodded, disappointed, but then I got an idea. “Hey, Grover. You want a magic item?”
His eyes lit up. “Me?”
Pretty soon we’d laced the sneakers over his fake feet, and the world’s first flying goat boy was
ready for launch.
“Maia!” he shouted.
He got off the ground okay, but then fell over sideways so his backpack dragged through the grass.
The winged shoes kept bucking up and down like tiny broncos.
“Practice,” Chiron called after him. “You just need practice!”
“Aaaaa!” Grover went flying sideways down the hill like a possessed lawn mower, heading
toward the van.
Before I could follow, Chiron caught my arm. “I should have trained you better, Percy,” he said.
“If only I had more time. Hercules, Jason-they all got more training.”
“That’s okay. I just wish-“
I stopped myself because I was about to sound like a brat. I was wishing my dad had given me a
cool magic item to help on the quest, something as good as Luke’s flying shoes, or Annabeth’s
invisible cap.
“What am I thinking?” Chiron cried. “I can’t let you get away without this.”
He pulled a pen from his coat pocket and handed it to me. It was an ordinary disposable ballpoint,
black ink, removable cap. Probably cost thirty cents.
“Gee,” I said. “Thanks.”
“Percy, that’s a gift from your father. I’ve kept it for years, not knowing you were who I was
waiting for. But the prophecy is clear to me now. You are the one.”
I remembered the field trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, when I’d vaporized Mrs. Dodds.
Chiron had thrown me a pen that turned into a sword. Could this be … ?
I took off the cap, and the pen grew longer and heavier in my hand. In half a second, I held a

to be staring intently at something down in the meadow.
“Luke!” I called.
He turned, eyes wide. I could swear he was standing three feet in front of me through a screen of
mist, except I could only see the part of him that appeared in the rainbow.
“Percy!” His scarred face broke into a grin. “Is that Annabeth, too? Thank the gods! Are you guys
okay?”
“We’re … uh … fine,” Annabeth stammered. She was madly straightening her dirty T-shirt, trying
to comb the loose hair out of her face. “We thought-Chiron-I mean-“
“He’s down at the cabins.” Luke’s smile faded. “We’re having some issues with the campers.
Listen, is everything cool with you? Is Grover all right?”
“I’m right here,” Grover called. He held the nozzle out to one side and stepped into Luke’s line of
vision. “What kind of issues?”
Just then a big Lincoln Continental pulled into the car wash with its stereo turned to maximum hiphop. As the car slid into the next stall, the bass from the subwoofers vibrated so much, it shook the
pavement.
“Chiron had to-what’s that noise?” Luke yelled.
“I’ll take care of it.’” Annabeth yelled back, looking very relieved to have an excuse to get out of
sight. “Grover, come on!
“What?” Grover said. “But-“
“Give Percy the nozzle and come on!” she ordered.
Grover muttered something about girls being harder to understand than the Oracle at Delphi, then
he handed me the spray gun and followed Annabeth.
I readjusted the hose so I could keep the rainbow going and still see Luke.
“Chiron had to break up a fight,” Luke shouted to me over the music. “Things are pretty tense
here, Percy. Word leaked out about the Zeus-Poseidon standoff. We’re still not sure how-probably
the same scumbag who summoned the hellhound. Now the campers are starting to take sides. It’s
shaping up like the Trojan War all over again. Aphrodite, Ares, and Apollo are backing Poseidon,
more or less. Athena is backing Zeus.”
I shuddered to think that Clarisse’s cabin would ever be on my dad’s side for anything. In the next
stall, I heard Annabeth and some guy arguing with each other, then the music’s volume decreased
drastically.
“So what’s your status?” Luke asked me. “Chiron will be sorry he missed you.”
I told him pretty much everything, including my dreams. It felt so good to see him, to feel like I
was back at camp even for a few minutes, that I didn’t realize how long I had talked until the beeper
went off on the spray machine, and I realized I only had one more minute before the water shut off.
“I wish I could be there,” Luke told me. “We can’t help much from here, I’m afraid, but listen …
it had to be Hades who took the master bolt. He was there at Olympus at the winter solstice. I was
chaperoning a field trip and we saw him.”
“But Chiron said the gods can’t take each other’s magic items directly.”
“That’s true,” Luke said, looking troubled. “Still … Hades has the helm of darkness. How could
anybody else sneak into the throne room and steal the master bolt? You’d have to be invisible.”
We were both silent, until Luke seemed to realize what he’d said.
“Oh, hey,” he protested. “I didn’t mean Annabeth. She and I have known each other forever. She
would never … I mean, she’s like a little sister to me.”
I wondered if Annabeth would like that description. In the stall next to us, the music stopped

completely. A man screamed in terror, car doors slammed, and the Lincoln peeled out of the car
wash.
“You’d better go see what that was,” Luke said. “Listen, are you wearing the flying shoes? I’ll
feel better if I know they’ve done you some good.”
“Oh … uh, yeah!” I tried not to sound like a guilty liar. “Yeah, they’ve come in handy.”
“Really?” He grinned. “They fit and everything?”
The water shut off. The mist started to evaporate.
“Well, take care of yourself out there in Denver,” Luke called, his voice getting fainter. “And tell
Grover it’ll be better this time! Nobody will get turned into a pine tree if he just-“
But the mist was gone, and Luke’s image faded to nothing. I was alone in a wet, empty car wash
stall.
Annabeth and Grover came around the corner, laughing, but stopped when they saw my face.
Annabeth’s smile faded. “What happened, Percy? What did Luke say?”
“Not much,” I lied, my stomach feeling as empty as a Big Three cabin. “Come on, let’s find some
dinner.”
A few minutes later, we were sitting at a booth in a gleaming chrome diner. All around us,
families were eating burgers and drinking malts and sodas.
Finally the waitress came over. She raised her eyebrow skeptically. “Well?”
I said, “We, um, want to order dinner.”
“You kids have money to pay for it?”
Grover’s lower lip quivered. I was afraid he would start bleating, or worse, start eating the
linoleum. Annabeth looked ready to pass out from hunger.
I was trying to think up a sob story for the waitress when a rumble shook the whole building; a
motorcycle the size of a baby elephant had pulled up to the curb.
All conversation in the diner stopped. The motorcycle’s headlight glared red. Its gas tank had
flames painted on it, and a shotgun holster riveted to either side, complete with shotguns. The seat
was leather-but leather that looked like … well, Caucasian human skin.
The guy on the bike would’ve made pro wrestlers run for Mama. He was dressed in a red muscle
shirt and black jeans and a black leather duster, with a hunting knife strapped to his thigh. He wore
red wraparound shades, and he had the cruelest, most brutal face I’d ever seen- handsome, I guess,
but wicked-with an oily black crew cut and cheeks that were scarred from many, many fights. The
weird thing was, I felt like I’d seen his face somewhere before.
As he walked into the diner, a hot, dry wind blew through the place. All the people rose, as if they
were hypnotized, but the biker waved his hand dismissively and they all sat down again. Everybody
went back to their conversations. The waitress blinked, as if somebody had just pressed the rewind
button on her brain. She asked us again, “You kids have money to pay for it?”
The biker said, “It’s on me.” He slid into our booth, which was way too small for him, and
crowded Annabeth against the window.
He looked up at the waitress, who was gaping at him, and said, “Are you still here?”
He pointed at her, and she stiffened. She turned as if she’d been spun around, then marched back
toward the kitchen.
The biker looked at me. I couldn’t see his eyes behind the red shades, but bad feelings started
boiling in my stomach. Anger, resentment, bitterness. I wanted to hit a wall. I wanted to pick a fight
with somebody. Who did this guy think he was?
He gave me a wicked grin. “So you’re old Seaweed’s kid, huh?”

the truck bumping around. We told Grover to promise the animals we’d help them more in the
morning, then we settled in for night.
Grover curled up on a turnip sack; Annabeth opened our bag of Double Stuf Oreos and nibbled on
one halfheartedly; I tried to cheer myself up by concentrating on the fact that we were halfway to Los
Angeles. Halfway to our destination. It was only June fourteenth. The solstice wasn’t until the twentyfirst. We could make it in plenty of time.
On the other hand, I had no idea what to expect next. The gods kept toying with me. At least
Hephaestus had the decency to be honest about it-he’d put up cameras and advertised me as
entertainment. But even when the cameras weren’t rolling, I had a feeling my quest was being
watched. I was a source of amusement for the gods.
“Hey,” Annabeth said, “I’m sorry for freaking out back at the water park, Percy.”
“That’s okay.”
“It’s just…” She shuddered. “Spiders.”
“Because of the Arachne story,” I guessed. “She got turned into a spider for challenging your mom
to a weaving contest, right?”
Annabeth nodded. “Arachne’s children have been taking revenge on the children of Athena ever
since. If there’s a spider within a mile of me, it’ll find me. I hate the creepy little things. Anyway, I
owe you.”
“We’re a team, remember?” I said. “Besides, Grover did the fancy flying.”
I thought he was asleep, but he mumbled from the corner, “I was pretty amazing, wasn’t I?”
Annabeth and I laughed.
She pulled apart an Oreo, handed me half. “In the Iris message … did Luke really say nothing?”
I munched my cookie and thought about how to answer. The conversation via rainbow had
bothered me all evening. “Luke said you and he go way back. He also said Grover wouldn’t fail this
time. Nobody would turn into a pine tree.”
In the dim bronze light of the sword blade, it was hard to read their expressions.
Grover let out a mournful bray.
“I should’ve told you the truth from the beginning.” His voice trembled. “I thought if you knew
what a failure I was, you wouldn’t want me along.”
“You were the satyr who tried to rescue Thalia, the daughter of Zeus.”
He nodded glumly.
“And the other two half-bloods Thalia befriended, the ones who got safely to camp …” I looked
at Annabeth. “That was you and Luke, wasn’t it?”
She put down her Oreo, uneaten. “Like you said, Percy, a seven-year-old half-blood wouldn’t
have made it very far alone. Athena guided me toward help. Thalia was twelve. Luke was fourteen.
They’d both run away from home, like me. They were happy to take me with them. They were …
amazing monster-fighters, even without training. We traveled north from Virginia without any real
plans, fending off monsters for about two weeks before Grover found us.”
“I was supposed to escort Thalia to camp,” he said, sniffling. “Only Thalia. I had strict orders
from Chiron: don’t do anything that would slow down the rescue. We knew Hades was after her, see,
but I couldn’t just leave Luke and Annabeth by themselves. I thought … I thought I could lead all three
of them to safety. It was my fault the Kindly Ones caught up with us. I froze. I got scared on the way
back to camp and took some wrong turns. If I’d just been a little quicker …”
“Stop it,” Annabeth said. “No one blames you. Thalia didn’t blame you either.”
“She sacrificed herself to save us,” he said miserably, “Her death was my fault. The Council of

Cloven Elders said so.”
“Because you wouldn’t leave two other half-bloods behind?” I said. “That’s not fair.”
“Percy’s right,” Annabeth said. “I wouldn’t be here today if it weren’t for you, Grover. Neither
would Luke. We don’t care what the council says.”
Grover kept sniffling in the dark. “It’s just my luck. I’m the lamest satyr ever, and I find the two
most powerful half-bloods of the century, Thalia and Percy.”
“You’re not lame,” Annabeth insisted. “You’ve got more courage than any satyr I’ve ever met.
Name one other who would dare go to the Underworld. I bet Percy is really glad you’re here right
now.”
She kicked me in the shin.
“Yeah,” I said, which I would’ve done even without the kick. “It’s not luck that you found Thalia
and me, Grover. You’ve got the biggest heart of any satyr ever. You’re a natural searcher. That’s why
you’ll be the one who finds Pan.”
I heard a deep, satisfied sigh. I waited for Grover to say something, but his breathing only got
heavier. When the sound turned to snoring, I realized he’d fallen sleep.
“How does he do that?” I marveled.
“I don’t know,” Annabeth said. “But that was really a nice thing you told him.”
“I meant it.”
We rode in silence for a few miles, bumping around on the feed sacks. The zebra munched a
turnip. The lion licked the last of the hamburger meat off his lips and looked at me hopefully.
Annabeth rubbed her necklace like she was thinking deep, strategic thoughts.
“That pine-tree bead,” I said. “Is that from your first year?”
She looked. She hadn’t realized what she was doing.
“Yeah,” she said. “Every August, the counselors pick the most important event of the summer, and
they paint it on that year’s beads. I’ve got Thalia’s pine tree, a Greek trireme on fire, a centaur in a
prom dress-now that was a weird summer….”
“And the college ring is your father’s?”
“That’s none of your-” She stopped herself. “Yeah. Yeah, it is.”
“You don’t have to tell me.”
“No … it’s okay.” She took a shaky breath. “My dad sent it to me folded up in a letter, two
summers ago. The ring was, like, his main keepsake from Athena. He wouldn’t have gotten through
his doctoral program at Harvard without her…. That’s a long story. Anyway, he said he wanted me to
have it. He apologized for being a jerk, said he loved me and missed me. He wanted me to come
home and live with him.”
“That doesn’t sound so bad.”
“Yeah, well… the problem was, I believed him. I tried to go home for that school year, but my
stepmom was the same as ever. She didn’t want her kids put in danger by living with a freak.
Monsters attacked. We argued. Monsters attacked. We argued. I didn’t even make it through winter
break. I called Chiron and came right back to Camp Half-Blood.”
“You think you’ll ever try living with your dad again?”
She wouldn’t meet my eyes. “Please. I’m not into self-inflicted pain.”
“You shouldn’t give up,” I told her. “You should write him a letter or something.”
“Thanks for the advice,” she said coldly, “but my father’s made his choice about who he wants to
live with.”
We passed another few miles of silence.

strength. That’s all he has. Even strength has to how to wisdom sometimes.
He cleaved downward at my head, but I wasn’t there.
My body thought for me. The water seemed to push me into the air and I catapulted over him,
slashing as I came down. But Ares was just as quick. He twisted, and the strike that should’ve caught
him directly in the spine was deflected off the end of his sword hilt.
He grinned. “Not bad, not bad.”
He slashed again and I was forced to jump onto dry land. I tried to sidestep, to get back to the
water, but Ares seemed to know what I wanted. He outmaneuvered me, pressing so hard I had to put
all my concentration on not getting sliced into pieces. I kept backing away from the surf. I couldn’t
find any openings to attack. His sword had a reach several feet longer than Anaklusmos.
Get in close, Luke had told me once, back in our sword class. When you’ve got the shorter blade,
get in close.
I stepped inside with a thrust, but Ares was waiting for that. He knocked my blade out of my
hands and kicked me in the chest. I went airborne-twenty, maybe thirty feet. I would’ve broken my
back if I hadn’t crashed into the soft sand of a dune.
“Percy!” Annabeth yelled. “Cops!”
I was seeing double. My chest felt like it had just been hit with a battering ram, but I managed to
get to my feet.
I couldn’t look away from Ares for fear he’d slice me in half, but out of the corner of my eye I
saw red lights flashing on the shoreline boulevard. Car doors were slamming.
“There, officer!” somebody yelled. “See?”
A gruff cop voice: “Looks like that kid on TV … what the heck …”
“That guy’s armed,” another cop said. “Call for backup.”
I rolled to one side as Ares’s blade slashed the sand.
I ran for my sword, scooped it up, and launched a swipe at Ares’s face, only to find my blade
deflected again.
Ares seemed to know exactly what I was going to do the moment before I did it.
I stepped back toward the surf, forcing him to follow.
“Admit it, kid,” Ares said. “You got no hope. I’m just toying with you.”
My senses were working overtime. I now understood what Annabeth had said about ADHD
keeping you alive in battle. I was wide awake, noticing every little detail.
I could see where Ares was tensing. I could tell which way he would strike. At the same time, I
was aware of Annabeth and Grover, thirty feet to my left. I saw a second cop car pulling up, siren
wailing. Spectators, people who had been wandering the streets because of the earthquake, were
starting to gather. Among the crowd, I thought I saw a few who were walking with the strange, trotting
gait of disguised satyrs. There were shimmering forms of spirits, too, as if the dead had risen from
Hades to watch the battle. I heard the flap of leathery wings circling somewhere above.
More sirens.
I stepped farther into the water, but Ares was fast. The tip of his blade ripped my sleeve and
grazed my forearm.
A police voice on a megaphone said, “Drop the guns.’ Set them on the ground. Now!”
Guns?
I looked at Ares’s weapon, and it seemed to be flickering; sometimes it looked like a shotgun,
sometimes a two-handed sword. I didn’t know what the humans were seeing in my hands, but I was
pretty sure it wouldn’t make them like me.

Percy Jackson 1 - The Lightning Thief
22 THE PROPHECY
COMES TRUE
We were the first heroes to return alive to Half-Blood Hill since Luke, so of course everybody
treated us as if we’d won some reality-TV contest. According to camp tradition, we wore laurel
wreaths to a big feast prepared in our honor, then led a procession down to the bonfire, where we got
to burn the burial shrouds our cabins had made for us in our absence.
Annabeth’s shroud was so beautiful-gray silk with embroidered owls-I told her it seemed a shame
not to bury her in it. She punched me and told me to shut up.
Being the son of Poseidon, I didn’t have any cabin mates, so the Ares cabin had volunteered to
make my shroud. They’d taken an old bedsheet and painted smiley faces with X’ed-out eyes around
the border, and the word LOSER painted really big in the middle.
It was fun to burn.
As Apollo’s cabin led the sing-along and passed out s’mores, I was surrounded by my old
Hermes cabinmates, Annabeth’s friends from Athena, and Grover’s satyr buddies, who were
admiring the brand-new searcher’s license he’d received from the Council of Cloven Elders. The
council had called Grover’s performance on the quest “Brave to the point of indigestion. Horns-andwhiskers above anything we have seen in the past.”
The only ones not in a party mood were Clarisse and her cabinmates, whose poisonous looks told
me they’d never forgive me for disgracing their dad.
That was okay with me.
Even Dionysus’s welcome-home speech wasn’t enough to dampen my spirits. “Yes, yes, so the
little brat didn’t get himself killed and now he’ll have an even bigger head. Well, huzzah for that. In
other announcements, there will be no canoe races this Saturday….”
I moved back into cabin three, but it didn’t feel so lonely anymore. I had my friends to train with
during the day. At night, I lay awake and listened to the sea, knowing my father was out there. Maybe
he wasn’t quite sure about me yet, maybe he hadn’t even wanted me born, but he was watching. And
so far, he was proud of what I’d done.
As for my mother, she had a chance at a new life. Her letter arrived a week after I got back to
camp. She told me Gabe had left mysteriously-disappeared off the face of the planet, in fact. She’d
reported him missing to the police, but she had a funny feeling they would never find him.
On a completely unrelated subject, she’d sold her first life-size concrete sculpture, entitled The
Poker Player, to a collector, through an art gallery in Soho. She’d gotten so much money for it, she’d
put a deposit down on a new apartment and made a payment on her first semester’s tuition at NYU.
The Soho gallery was clamoring for more of her work, which they called “a huge step forward in
super-ugly neorealism.”
But don’t worry, my mom wrote. I’m done with sculpture. I’ve disposed of that box of tools you
left me. It’s time for me to turn to writing.
At the bottom, she wrote a P.S.: Percy, I’ve found a good private school here in the city. I’ve put a
deposit down to hold you a spot, in case you want to enroll for seventh grade. You could live at
home. But if you want to go year-round at Half-Blood Hill, I’ll understand.

From time to time, I’d walk past the Big House, glance up at the attic windows, and think about
the Oracle. I tried to convince myself that its prophecy had come to completion.
You shall go west, and face the god who has turned.
Been there, done that-even though the traitor god had turned out to be Ares rather than Hades.
You shall find what was stolen, and see it safe returned.
Check. One master bolt delivered. One helm of darkness back on Hades’s oily head.
You shall be betrayed by one who calls you a friend.
This line still bothered me. Ares had pretended to be my friend, then betrayed me. That must be
what the Oracle meant….
And you shall fail to save what matters most, in the end.
I had failed to save my mom, but only because I’d let her save herself, and I knew that was the
right thing.
So why was I still uneasy?
The last night of the summer session came all too quickly.
The campers had one last meal together. We burned part of our dinner for the gods. At the bonfire,
the senior counselors awarded the end-of-summer beads.
I got my own leather necklace, and when I saw the bead for my first summer, I was glad the
firelight covered my blushing. The design was pitch black, with a sea-green trident shimmering in the
center.
“The choice was unanimous,” Luke announced. “This bead commemorates the first Son of the Sea
God at this camp, and the quest he undertook into the darkest part of the Underworld to stop a war!”
The entire camp got to their feet and cheered. Even Ares’s cabin felt obliged to stand. Athena’s
cabin steered Annabeth to the front so she could share in the applause.
I’m not sure I’d ever felt as happy or sad as I did at that moment. I’d finally found a family,
people who cared about me and thought I’d done something right. And in the morning, most of them
would be leaving for the year.
***
The next morning, I found a form letter on my bedside table.
I knew Dionysus must’ve filled it out, because he stubbornly insisted on getting my name wrong:
Dear Peter Johnson ,
If you intend to stay at Camp Half-Blood year-round, you must inform the Big House by noon
today. If you do not announce your intentions, we will assume you have vacated your cabin or died a
horrible death. Cleaning harpies will begin work at sundown. They will be authorized to eat any
unregistered campers. All personal articles left behind will be incinerated in the lava pit.
Have a nice day!
Mr. D (Dionysus)
Camp Director, Olympian Council #12
That’s another thing about ADHD. Deadlines just aren’t real to me until I’m staring one in the
face. Summer was over, and I still hadn’t answered my mother, or the camp, about whether I’d be
staying. Now I had only a few hours to decide.
The decision should have been easy. I mean, nine months of hero training or nine months of sitting
in a classroom-duh.
But there was my mom to consider. For the first time, I had the chance to live with her for a whole
year, without Gabe. I had a chance be at home and knock around the city in my free time. I
remembered what Annabeth had said so long ago on our quest: The real world is where the monsters

are. That’s where you learn whether you’re any good or not.
I thought about the fate of Thalia, daughter of Zeus. I wondered how many monsters would attack
me if I left Half-Blood Hill. If I stayed in one place for a whole school year, without Chiron or my
friends around to help me, would my mother and I even survive until the next summer? That was
assuming the spelling tests and five-paragraph essays didn’t kill me. I decided I’d go down to the
arena and do some sword practice. Maybe that would clear my head.
The campgrounds were mostly deserted, shimmering in the August heat. All the campers were in
their cabins packing up, or running around with brooms and mops, getting ready for final inspection.
Argus was helping some of the Aphrodite kids haul their Gucci suitcases and makeup kits over the
hill, where the camp’s shuttle bus would be waiting to take them to the airport.
Don’t think about leaving yet, I told myself. Just train.
I got to the sword-fighters arena and found that Luke had had the same idea. His gym bag was
plopped at the edge of the stage. He was working solo, whaling on battle dummies with a sword I’d
never seen before. It must’ve been a regular steel blade, because he was slashing the dummies’ heads
right off, stabbing through their straw-stuffed guts. His orange counselor’s shirt was dripping with
sweat. His expression was so intense, his life might’ve really been in danger. I watched, fascinated,
as he disemboweled the whole row of dummies, hacking off limbs and basically reducing them to a
pile of straw and armor.
They were only dummies, but I still couldn’t help being awed by Luke’s skill. The guy was an
incredible fighter. It made me wonder, again, how he possibly could’ve failed at his quest.
Finally, he saw me, and stopped mid-swing. “Percy.”
“Um, sorry,” I said, embarrassed. “I just-“
“It’s okay,” he said, lowering his sword. “Just doing some last-minute practice.”
“Those dummies won’t be bothering anybody anymore.”
Luke shrugged. “We build new ones every summer.”
Now that his sword wasn’t swirling around, I could see something odd about it. The blade was
two different types of metal-one edge bronze, the other steel.
Luke noticed me looking at it. “Oh, this? New toy. This is Backbiter.”
“Backbiter?”
Luke turned the blade in the light so it glinted wickedly. “One side is celestial bronze. The other
is tempered steel. Works on mortals and immortals both.”
I thought about what Chiron had told me when I started my quest-that a hero should never harm
mortals unless absolutely necessary.
“I didn’t know they could make weapons like that.”
“They probably can’t,” Luke agreed. “It’s one of a kind.”
He gave me a tiny smile, then slid the sword into its scabbard. “Listen, I was going to come
looking for you. What do you say we go down to the woods one last time, look for something to
fight?”
I don’t know why I hesitated. I should’ve felt relieved that Luke was being so friendly. Ever since
I’d gotten back from the quest, he’d been acting a little distant. I was afraid he might resent me for all
the attention I’d gotten.
“You think it’s a good idea?” I asked. “I mean-“
“Aw, come on.” He rummaged in his gym bag and pulled out a six-pack of Cokes. “Drinks are on
me.”
I stared at the Cokes, wondering where the heck he’d gotten them. There were no regular mortal

sodas at the camp store. No way to smuggle them in unless you talked to a satyr, maybe.
Of course, the magic dinner goblets would fill with anything you want, but it just didn’t taste the
same as a real Coke, straight out of the can.
Sugar and caffeine. My willpower crumbled.
“Sure,” I decided. “Why not?”
We walked down to the woods and kicked around for some kind of monster to fight, but it was too
hot. All the monsters with any sense must’ve been taking siestas in their nice cool caves.
We found a shady spot by the creek where I’d broken Clarisse’s spear during my first capture the
flag game. We sat on a big rock, drank our Cokes, and watched the sunlight in the woods.
After a while Luke said, “You miss being on a quest?”
“With monsters attacking me every three feet? Are you kidding?”
Luke raised an eyebrow.
“Yeah, I miss it,” I admitted. “You?”
A shadow passed over his face.
I was used to hearing from the girls how good-looking Luke was, but at the moment, he looked
weary, and angry, and not at all handsome. His blond hair was gray in the sunlight. The scar on his
face looked deeper than usual. I could imagine him as an old man.
“I’ve lived at Half-Blood Hill year-round since I was fourteen,” he told me. “Ever since Thalia
… well, you know. I trained, and trained, and trained. I never got to be a normal teenager, out there in
the real world. Then they threw me one quest, and when I came back, it was like, ‘Okay, ride’s over.
Have a nice life.’”
He crumpled his Coke can and threw into the creek, which really shocked me. One of the first
things you learn at Camp Half-Blood is: Don’t litter. You’ll hear from the nymphs and the naiads.
They’ll get even. You’ll crawl into bed one night and find your sheets filled with centipedes and mud.
“The heck with laurel wreaths,” Luke said. “I’m not going to end up like those dusty trophies in
the Big House attic.”
“You make it sound like you’re leaving.”
Luke gave me a twisted smile. “Oh, I’m leaving, all right, Percy. I brought you down here to say
good-bye.”
He snapped his fingers. A small fire burned a hole in the ground at my feet. Out crawled
something glistening black, about the size of my hand. A scorpion.
I started to go for my pen.
“I wouldn’t,” Luke cautioned. “Pit scorpions can jump up to fifteen feet. Its stinger can pierce
right through your clothes. You’ll be dead in sixty seconds.”
“Luke, what-“
Then it hit me.
You will be betrayed by one who calls you a friend.
“You,” I said.
He stood calmly and brushed off his jeans.
The scorpion paid him no attention. It kept its beady black eyes on me, clamping its pincers as it
crawled onto my shoe.
“I saw a lot out there in the world, Percy,” Luke said. “Didn’t you feel it-the darkness gathering,
the monsters growing stronger? Didn’t you realize how useless it all is? All the heroics-being pawns
of the gods. They should’ve been overthrown thousands of years ago, but they’ve hung on, thanks to us
half-bloods.”

I couldn’t believe this was happening.
“Luke … you’re talking about our parents,” I said.
He laughed. “That’s supposed to make me love them? Their precious ‘Western civilization is a
disease, Percy. It’s killing the world. The only way to stop it is to burn it to the ground, start over
with something more honest.”
“You’re as crazy as Ares.”
His eyes flared. “Ares is a fool. He never realized the true master he was serving. If I had time,
Percy, I could explain. But I’m afraid you won’t live that long.”
The scorpion crawled onto my pants leg.
There had to be a way out of this. I needed time to think.
“Kronos,” I said. “That’s who you serve.”
The air got colder.
“You should be careful with names,” Luke warned.
“Kronos got you to steal the master bolt and the helm. He spoke to you in your dreams.”
Luke’s eye twitched. “He spoke to you, too, Percy. You should’ve listened.”
“He’s brainwashing you, Luke.”
“You’re wrong. He showed me that my talents are being wasted. You know what my quest was
two years ago, Percy? My father, Hermes, wanted me to steal a golden apple from the Garden of the
Hesperides and return it to Olympus. After all the training I’d done, that was the best he could think
up.”
“That’s not an easy quest,” I said. “Hercules did it.”
“Exactly,” Luke said. “Where’s the glory in repeating what others have done? All the gods know
how to do is replay their past. My heart wasn’t in it. The dragon in the garden gave me this”-he
pointed angrily at his scar-“and when I came back, all I got was pity. I wanted to pull Olympus down
stone by stone right then, but I bided my time. I began to dream of Kronos. He convinced me to steal
something worthwhile, something no hero had ever had the courage to take. When we went on that
winter-solstice field trip, while the other campers were asleep, I snuck into the throne room and took
Zeus’s master bolt right from his chair. Hades’s helm of darkness, too. You wouldn’t believe how
easy it was. The Olympians are so arrogant; they never dreamed someone would dare steal from
them. Their security is horrible. I was halfway across New Jersey before I heard the storms rumbling,
and I knew they’d discovered my theft.”
The scorpion was sitting on my knee now, staring at me with its glittering eyes. I tried to keep my
voice level. “So why didn’t you bring the items to Kronos?”
Luke’s smile wavered. “I … I got overconfident. Zeus sent out his sons and daughters to find the
stolen bolt- Artemis, Apollo, my father, Hermes. But it was Ares who caught me. I could have beaten
him, but I wasn’t careful enough. He disarmed me, took the items of power, threatened to return them
to Olympus and burn me alive. Then Kronos’s voice came to me and told me what to say. I put the
idea in Ares’s head about a great war between the gods. I said all he had to do was hide the items
away for a while and watch the others fight. Ares got a wicked gleam in his eyes. I knew he was
hooked. He let me go, and I returned to Olympus before anyone noticed my absence.” Luke drew his
new sword. He ran his thumb down the flat of the blade, as if he were hypnotized by its beauty.
“Afterward, the Lord of the Titans … h-he punished me with nightmares. I swore not to fail again.
Back at Camp Half-Blood, in my dreams, I was told that a second hero would arrive, one who could
be tricked into taking the bolt and the helm the rest of the way-from Ares down to Tartarus.”
“You summoned the hellhound, that night in the forest.”

“We had to make Chiron think the camp wasn’t safe for you, so he would start you on your quest.
We had to confirm his fears that Hades was after you. And it worked.”
“The flying shoes were cursed,” I said. “They were supposed to drag me and the backpack into
Tartarus.”
“And they would have, if you’d been wearing them. But you gave them to the satyr, which wasn’t
part of the plan. Grover messes up everything he touches. He even confused the curse.”
Luke looked down at the scorpion, which was now sitting on my thigh. “You should have died in
Tartarus, Percy. But don’t worry, I’ll leave you with my little friend to set things right.”
“Thalia gave her life to save you,” I said, gritting my teeth. “And this is how you repay her?”
“Don’t speak of Thalia!” he shouted. “The gods let her die! That’s one of the many things they
will pay for.”
“You’re being used, Luke. You and Ares both. Don’t listen to Kronos.”
“I’ve been used?” Luke’s voice turned shrill. “Look at yourself. What has your dad ever done for
you? Kronos will rise. You’ve only delayed his plans. He will cast the Olympians into Tartarus and
drive humanity back to their caves. All except the strongest-the ones who serve him.”
“Call off the bug,” I said. “If you’re so strong, fight me yourself”
Luke smiled. “Nice try, Percy. But I’m not Ares. You can’t bait me. My lord is waiting, and he’s
got plenty of quests for me to undertake.”
“Luke-“
“Good-bye, Percy. There is a new Golden Age coming. You won’t be part of it.”
He slashed his sword in an arc and disappeared in a ripple of darkness.
The scorpion lunged.
I swatted it away with my hand and uncapped my sword. The thing jumped at me and I cut it in
half in midair.
I was about to congratulate myself until I looked down at my hand. My palm had a huge red welt,
oozing and smoking with yellow guck. The thing had gotten me after all.
My ears pounded. My vision went foggy. The water, I thought. It healed me before.
I stumbled to the creek and submerged my hand, but nothing seemed to happen. The poison was
too strong. My vision was getting dark. I could barely stand up.
Sixty seconds, Luke had told me.
I had to get back to camp. If I collapsed out here, my body would be dinner for a monster. Nobody
would ever know what had happened.
My legs felt like lead. My forehead was burning. I stumbled toward the camp, and the nymphs
stirred from their trees.
“Help,” I croaked. “Please …”
Two of them took my arms, pulling me along. I remember making it to the clearing, a counselor
shouting for help, a centaur blowing a conch horn.
Then everything went black.
***
I woke with a drinking straw in my mouth. I was sipping something that tasted like liquid
chocolate-chip cookies. Nectar.
I opened my eyes.
I was propped up in bed in the sickroom of the Big House, my right hand bandaged like a club.
Argus stood guard in the corner. Annabeth sat next to me, holding my nectar glass and dabbing a
washcloth on my forehead.

“Here we are again,” I said.
“You idiot,” Annabeth said, which is how I knew she was overjoyed to see me conscious. “You
were green and turning gray when we found you. If it weren’t for Chiron’s healing …”
“Now, now,” Chiron’s voice said. “Percy’s constitution deserves some of the credit.”
He was sitting near the foot of my bed in human form, which was why I hadn’t noticed him yet.
His lower half was magically compacted into the wheelchair, his upper half dressed in a coat and tie.
He smiled, but his face looked weary and pale, the way it did when he’d been up all night grading
Latin papers.
“How are you feeling?” he asked.
“Like my insides have been frozen, then microwaved.”
“Apt, considering that was pit scorpion venom. Now you must tell me, if you can, exactly what
happened.”
Between sips of nectar, I told them the story.
The room was quiet for a long time.
“I can’t believe that Luke …” Annabeth’s voice faltered. Her expression turned angry and sad.
“Yes. Yes, I can believe it. May the gods curse him…. He was never the same after his quest.”
“This must be reported to Olympus,” Chiron murmured. “I will go at once.”
“Luke is out there right now,” I said. “I have to go after him.”
Chiron shook his head. “No, Percy. The gods-“
“Won’t even talk about Kronos,” I snapped. “Zeus declared the matter closed!”
“Percy, I know this is hard. But you must not rush out for vengeance. You aren’t ready.”
I didn’t like it, but part of me suspected Chiron was right. One look at my hand, and I knew I
wasn’t going to be sword fighting any time soon. “Chiron … your prophecy from the Oracle … it was
about Kronos, wasn’t it? Was I in it? And Annabeth?”
Chiron glanced nervously at the ceiling. “Percy, it isn’t my place-“
“You’ve been ordered not to talk to me about it, haven’t you?”
His eyes were sympathetic, but sad. “You will be a great hero, child. I will do my best to prepare
you. But if I’m right about the path ahead of you …”
Thunder boomed overhead, rattling the windows.
“All right!” Chiron shouted. “Fine!”
He sighed in frustration. “The gods have their reasons, Percy. Knowing too much of your future is
never a good thing.”
“We can’t just sit back and do nothing,” I said.
“We will not sit back,” Chiron promised. “But you must be careful. Kronos wants you to come
unraveled. He wants your life disrupted, your thoughts clouded with fear and anger. Do not give him
what he wants. Train patiently. Your time will come.”
“Assuming I live that long.”
Chiron put his hand on my ankle. “You’ll have to trust me, Percy. You will live. But first you must
decide your path for the coming year. I cannot tell you the right choice….” I got the feeling that he had
a very definite opinion, and it was taking all his willpower not to advise me. “But you must decide
whether to stay at Camp Half-Blood year-round, or return to the mortal world for seventh grade and
be a summer camper. Think on that. When I get back from Olympus, you must tell me your decision.”
I wanted to protest. I wanted to ask him more questions. But his expression told me there could be
no more discussion; he had said as much as he could.
“I’ll be back as soon as I can,” Chiron promised. “Argus will watch over you.”

He glanced at Annabeth. “Oh, and, my dear … whenever you’re ready, they’re here.”
“Who’s here?” I asked.
Nobody answered.
Chiron rolled himself out of the room. I heard the wheels of his chair clunk carefully down the
front steps, two at a time.
Annabeth studied the ice in my drink.
“What’s wrong?” I asked her.
“Nothing.” She set the glass on the table. “I … just took your advice about something. You … um
… need anything?”
“Yeah. Help me up. I want to go outside.”
“Percy, that isn’t a good idea.”
I slid my legs out of bed. Annabeth caught me before I could crumple to the floor. A wave of
nausea rolled over me.
Annabeth said, “I told you …”
“I’m fine,” I insisted. I didn’t want to lie in bed like an invalid while Luke was out there planning
to destroy the Western world.
I managed a step forward. Then another, still leaning heavily on Annabeth. Argus followed us
outside, but he kept his distance.
By the time we reached the porch, my face was beaded with sweat. My stomach had twisted into
knots. But I had managed to make it all the way to the railing.
It was dusk. The camp looked completely deserted. The cabins were dark and the volleyball pit
silent. No canoes cut the surface of the lake. Beyond the woods and the strawberry fields, the Long
Island Sound glittered in the last light of the sun.
“What are you going to do?” Annabeth asked me.
“I don’t know.”
I told her I got the feeling Chiron wanted me to stay year-round, to put in more individual training
time, but I wasn’t sure that’s what I wanted. I admitted I’d feel bad about leaving her alone, though,
with only Clarisse for company….
Annabeth pursed her lips, then said quietly, “I’m going home for the year, Percy.”
I stared at her. “You mean, to your dad’s?”
She pointed toward the crest of Half-Blood Hill. Next to Thalia’s pine tree, at the very edge of
the camp’s magical boundaries, a family stood silhouetted-two little children, a woman, and a tall
man with blond hair. They seemed to be waiting. The man was holding a backpack that looked like
the one Annabeth had gotten from Waterland in Denver.
“I wrote him a letter when we got back,” Annabeth said. “Just like you suggested. I told him … I
was sorry. I’d come home for the school year if he still wanted me. He wrote back immediately. We
decided … we’d give it another try.”
“That took guts.”
She pursed her lips. “You won’t try anything stupid during the school year, will you? At least …
not without sending me an Iris-message?”
I managed a smile. “I won’t go looking for trouble. I usually don’t have to.”
“When I get back next summer,” she said, “we’ll hunt down Luke. We’ll ask for a quest, but if we
don’t get approval, we’ll sneak off and do it anyway. Agreed?”
“Sounds like a plan worthy of Athena.”
She held out her hand. I shook it.

