I rose next morning with a feeling of hopeful exhilaration, in spite of
the disappointments already experienced; but I found the dressing of Mary
Ann was no light matter, as her abundant hair was to be smeared with
pomade, plaited in three long tails, and tied with bows of ribbon: a task
my unaccustomed fingers found great difficulty in performing. She told
me her nurse could do it in half the time, and, by keeping up a constant
fidget of impatience, contrived to render me still longer. When all was
done, we went into the schoolroom, where I met my other pupil, and
chatted with the two till it was time to go down to breakfast. That meal
being concluded, and a few civil words having been exchanged with Mrs.
Bloomfield, we repaired to the schoolroom again, and commenced the
business of the day. I found my pupils very backward, indeed; but Tom,
though averse to every species of mental exertion, was not without
abilities. Mary Ann could scarcely read a word, and was so careless and
inattentive that I could hardly get on with her at all. However, by dint
of great labour and patience, I managed to get something done in the
course of the morning, and then accompanied my young charge out into the
garden and adjacent grounds, for a little recreation before dinner.
There we got along tolerably together, except that I found they had no
notion of going with me: I must go with them, wherever they chose to lead
me. I must run, walk, or stand, exactly as it suited their fancy. This,
I thought, was reversing the order of things; and I found it doubly
disagreeable, as on this as well as subsequent occasions, they seemed to
prefer the dirtiest places and the most dismal occupations. But there
was no remedy; either I must follow them, or keep entirely apart from
them, and thus appear neglectful of my charge. To-day, they manifested a
particular attachment to a well at the bottom of the lawn, where they
persisted in dabbling with sticks and pebbles for above half an hour. I
was in constant fear that their mother would see them from the window,
and blame me for allowing them thus to draggle their clothes and wet
their feet and hands, instead of taking exercise; but no arguments,
commands, or entreaties could draw them away. If _she_ did not see them,
some one else did—a gentleman on horseback had entered the gate and was
proceeding up the road; at the distance of a few paces from us he paused,
and calling to the children in a waspish penetrating tone, bade them
‘keep out of that water.’ ‘Miss Grey,’ said he, ‘(I suppose it _is_ Miss
Grey), I am surprised that you should allow them to dirty their clothes
in that manner! Don’t you see how Miss Bloomfield has soiled her frock?
and that Master Bloomfield’s socks are quite wet? and both of them
without gloves? Dear, dear! Let me _request_ that in future you will
keep them _decent_ at least!’ so saying, he turned away, and continued
his ride up to the house. This was Mr. Bloomfield. I was surprised that
he should nominate his children Master and Miss Bloomfield; and still
more so, that he should speak so uncivilly to me, their governess, and a
perfect stranger to himself. Presently the bell rang to summon us in. I
dined with the children at one, while he and his lady took their luncheon
at the same table. His conduct there did not greatly raise him in my
estimation. He was a man of ordinary stature—rather below than above—and
rather thin than stout, apparently between thirty and forty years of age:
he had a large mouth, pale, dingy complexion, milky blue eyes, and hair
the colour of a hempen cord. There was a roast leg of mutton before him:
he helped Mrs. Bloomfield, the children, and me, desiring me to cut up
the children’s meat; then, after twisting about the mutton in various
directions, and eyeing it from different points, he pronounced it not fit
to be eaten, and called for the cold beef.
