We were discussing these affairs on the morning I have mentioned, about a
fortnight after my father’s death, when a letter was brought in for my
mother, on beholding which the colour mounted to her face—lately pale
enough with anxious watchings and excessive sorrow. ‘From my father!’
murmured she, as she hastily tore off the cover. It was many years since
she had heard from any of her own relations before. Naturally wondering
what the letter might contain, I watched her countenance while she read
it, and was somewhat surprised to see her bite her lip and knit her brows
as if in anger. When she had done, she somewhat irreverently cast it on
the table, saying with a scornful smile,—‘Your grandpapa has been so kind
as to write to me. He says he has no doubt I have long repented of my
“unfortunate marriage,” and if I will only acknowledge this, and confess
I was wrong in neglecting his advice, and that I have justly suffered for
it, he will make a lady of me once again—if that be possible after my
long degradation—and remember my girls in his will. Get my desk, Agnes,
and send these things away: I will answer the letter directly. But
first, as I may be depriving you both of a legacy, it is just that I
should tell you what I mean to say. I shall say that he is mistaken in
supposing that I can regret the birth of my daughters (who have been the
pride of my life, and are likely to be the comfort of my old age), or the
thirty years I have passed in the company of my best and dearest
friend;—that, had our misfortunes been three times as great as they were
(unless they had been of my bringing on), I should still the more rejoice
to have shared them with your father, and administered what consolation I
was able; and, had his sufferings in illness been ten times what they
wore, I could not regret having watched over and laboured to relieve
them;—that, if he had married a richer wife, misfortunes and trials would
no doubt have come upon him still; while I am egotist enough to imagine
that no other woman could have cheered him through them so well: not that
I am superior to the rest, but I was made for him, and he for me; and I
can no more repent the hours, days, years of happiness we have spent
together, and which neither could have had without the other, than I can
the privilege of having been his nurse in sickness, and his comfort in
affliction.
