‘The best way to enjoy yourself is to do what is right and hate nobody.
The end of Religion is not to teach us how to die, but how to live; and
the earlier you become wise and good, the more of happiness you secure.
And now, Lady Ashby, I have one more piece of advice to offer you, which
is, that you will not make an enemy of your mother-in-law. Don’t get
into the way of holding her at arms’ length, and regarding her with
jealous distrust. I never saw her, but I have heard good as well as evil
respecting her; and I imagine that, though cold and haughty in her
general demeanour, and even exacting in her requirements, she has strong
affections for those who can reach them; and, though so blindly attached
to her son, she is not without good principles, or incapable of hearing
reason. If you would but conciliate her a little, and adopt a friendly,
open manner—and even confide your grievances to her—real grievances, such
as you have a right to complain of—it is my firm belief that she would,
in time, become your faithful friend, and a comfort and support to you,
instead of the incubus you describe her.’ But I fear my advice had
little effect upon the unfortunate young lady; and, finding I could
render myself so little serviceable, my residence at Ashby Park became
doubly painful. But still, I must stay out that day and the following
one, as I had promised to do so: though, resisting all entreaties and
inducements to prolong my visit further, I insisted upon departing the
next morning; affirming that my mother would be lonely without me, and
that she impatiently expected my return. Nevertheless, it was with a
heavy heart that I bade adieu to poor Lady Ashby, and left her in her
princely home. It was no slight additional proof of her unhappiness,
that she should so cling to the consolation of my presence, and earnestly
desire the company of one whose general tastes and ideas were so little
congenial to her own—whom she had completely forgotten in her hour of
prosperity, and whose presence would be rather a nuisance than a
pleasure, if she could but have half her heart’s desire.
