Was it then come to this—that I should be _disappointed_ to receive a
letter from my only sister: and because it was not written by a
comparative stranger? Dear Mary! and she had written it so kindly—and
thinking I should be so pleased to have it!—I was not worthy to read it!
And I believe, in my indignation against myself, I should have put it
aside till I had schooled myself into a better frame of mind, and was
become more deserving of the honour and privilege of its perusal: but
there was my mother looking on, and wishful to know what news it
contained; so I read it and delivered it to her, and then went into the
schoolroom to attend to the pupils: but amidst the cares of copies and
sums—in the intervals of correcting errors here, and reproving
derelictions of duty there, I was inwardly taking myself to task with far
sterner severity. ‘What a fool you must be,’ said my head to my heart,
or my sterner to my softer self;—‘how could you ever dream that he would
write to you? What grounds have you for such a hope—or that he will see
you, or give himself any trouble about you—or even think of you again?’
‘What grounds?’—and then Hope set before me that last, short interview,
and repeated the words I had so faithfully treasured in my memory.
‘Well, and what was there in that?—Who ever hung his hopes upon so frail
a twig? What was there in those words that any common acquaintance might
not say to another? Of course, it was possible you might meet again: he
might have said so if you had been going to New Zealand; but that did not
imply any _intention_ of seeing you—and then, as to the question that
followed, anyone might ask that: and how did you answer?—Merely with a
stupid, commonplace reply, such as you would have given to Master Murray,
or anyone else you had been on tolerably civil terms with.’ ‘But, then,’
persisted Hope, ‘the tone and manner in which he spoke.’ ‘Oh, that is
nonsense! he always speaks impressively; and at that moment there were
the Greens and Miss Matilda Murray just before, and other people passing
by, and he was obliged to stand close beside you, and to speak very low,
unless he wished everybody to hear what he said, which—though it was
nothing at all particular—of course, he would rather not.’ But then,
above all, that emphatic, yet gentle pressure of the hand, which seemed
to say, ‘_Trust_ me;’ and many other things besides—too delightful,
almost too flattering, to be repeated even to one’s self. ‘Egregious
folly—too absurd to require contradiction—mere inventions of the
imagination, which you ought to be ashamed of. If you would but consider
your own unattractive exterior, your unamiable reserve, your foolish
diffidence—which must make you appear cold, dull, awkward, and perhaps
ill-tempered too;—if you had but rightly considered these from the
beginning, you would never have harboured such presumptuous thoughts: and
now that you have been so foolish, pray repent and amend, and let us have
no more of it!’
