It was decreed that on the last day of January I was to enter upon my new
office as governess in the family of Mr. Murray, of Horton Lodge, near
O---, about seventy miles from our village: a formidable distance to me,
as I had never been above twenty miles from home in all the course of my
twenty years’ sojourn on earth; and as, moreover, every individual in
that family and in the neighbourhood was utterly unknown to myself and
all my acquaintances. But this rendered it only the more piquant to me.
I had now, in some measure, got rid of the _mauvaise honte_ that had
formerly oppressed me so much; there was a pleasing excitement in the
idea of entering these unknown regions, and making my way alone among its
strange inhabitants. I now flattered myself I was going to see something
in the world: Mr. Murray’s residence was near a large town, and not in a
manufacturing district, where the people had nothing to do but to make
money; his rank from what I could gather, appeared to be higher than that
of Mr. Bloomfield; and, doubtless, he was one of those genuine
thoroughbred gentry my mother spoke of, who would treat his governess
with due consideration as a respectable well-educated lady, the
instructor and guide of his children, and not a mere upper servant.
Then, my pupils being older, would be more rational, more teachable, and
less troublesome than the last; they would be less confined to the
schoolroom, and not require that constant labour and incessant watching;
and, finally, bright visions mingled with my hopes, with which the care
of children and the mere duties of a governess had little or nothing to
do. Thus, the reader will see that I had no claim to be regarded as a
martyr to filial piety, going forth to sacrifice peace and liberty for
the sole purpose of laying up stores for the comfort and support of my
parents: though certainly the comfort of my father, and the future
support of my mother, had a large share in my calculations; and fifty
pounds appeared to me no ordinary sum. I must have decent clothes
becoming my station; I must, it seemed, put out my washing, and also pay
for my four annual journeys between Horton Lodge and home; but with
strict attention to economy, surely twenty pounds, or little more, would
cover those expenses, and then there would be thirty for the bank, or
little less: what a valuable addition to our stock! Oh, I must struggle
to keep this situation, whatever it might be! both for my own honour
among my friends and for the solid services I might render them by my
continuance there.
