Early in June, I received a letter from Lady Ashby, late Miss Murray.
She had written to me twice or thrice before, from the different stages
of her bridal tour, always in good spirits, and professing to be very
happy. I wondered every time that she had not forgotten me, in the midst
of so much gaiety and variety of scene. At length, however, there was a
pause; and it seemed she had forgotten me, for upwards of seven months
passed away and no letter. Of course, I did not break my heart about
_that_, though I often wondered how she was getting on; and when this
last epistle so unexpectedly arrived, I was glad enough to receive it.
It was dated from Ashby Park, where she was come to settle down at last,
having previously divided her time between the continent and the
metropolis. She made many apologies for having neglected me so long,
assured me she had not forgotten me, and had often intended to write, &c.
&c., but had always been prevented by something. She acknowledged that
she had been leading a very dissipated life, and I should think her very
wicked and very thoughtless; but, notwithstanding that, she thought a
great deal, and, among other things, that she should vastly like to see
me. ‘We have been several days here already,’ wrote she. ‘We have not a
single friend with us, and are likely to be very dull. You know I never
had a fancy for living with my husband like two turtles in a nest, were
he the most delightful creature that ever wore a coat; so do take pity
upon me and come. I suppose your Midsummer holidays commence in June,
the same as other people’s; therefore you cannot plead want of time; and
you must and shall come—in fact, I shall die if you don’t. I want you to
visit me as a friend, and stay a long time. There is nobody with me, as
I told you before, but Sir Thomas and old Lady Ashby: but you needn’t
mind them—they’ll trouble us but little with their company. And you
shall have a room to yourself, whenever you like to retire to it, and
plenty of books to read when my company is not sufficiently amusing. I
forget whether you like babies; if you do, you may have the pleasure of
seeing mine—the most charming child in the world, no doubt; and all the
more so, that I am not troubled with nursing it—I was determined I
wouldn’t be bothered with that. Unfortunately, it is a girl, and Sir
Thomas has never forgiven me: but, however, if you will only come, I
promise you shall be its governess as soon as it can speak; and you shall
bring it up in the way it should go, and make a better woman of it than
its mamma. And you shall see my poodle, too: a splendid little charmer
imported from Paris: and two fine Italian paintings of great value—I
forget the artist. Doubtless you will be able to discover prodigious
beauties in them, which you must point out to me, as I only admire by
hearsay; and many elegant curiosities besides, which I purchased at Rome
and elsewhere; and, finally, you shall see my new home—the splendid house
and grounds I used to covet so greatly. Alas! how far the promise of
anticipation exceeds the pleasure of possession! There’s a fine
sentiment! I assure you I am become quite a grave old matron: pray come,
if it be only to witness the wonderful change. Write by return of post,
and tell me when your vacation commences, and say that you will come the
day after, and stay till the day before it closes—in mercy to
