"... The public is warned that Black is armed and extremely dangerous. A
special hot line has been set up, and any sighting of Black should be
reported immediately."

"Sirius Black," he said, nodding. "'Course 'e was on the Muggle news,
Neville, where you been?"

Sirius Black, possibly the most infamous prisoner ever to be held in
Azkaban fortress, is still eluding capture, the Ministry of Magic
confirmed today.

"We are doing all we can to recapture Black," said the Minister of
Magic, Cornelius Fudge, this morning, "and we beg the magical community
to remain calm."

"Well, really, I had to, don't you know," said an irritable Fudge.
"Black is mad. He's a danger to anyone who crosses him, magic or Muggle.
I have the Prime Minister's assurance that he will not breathe a word of
Black's true identity to anyone. And let's face it-who'd believe him if
he did?"

While Muggles have been told that Black is carrying a gun (a kind of
metal wand that Muggles use to kill each other), the magical community
lives in fear of a massacre like that of twelve years ago, when Black
murdered thirteen people with a single curse.

Harry looked into the shadowed eyes of Sirius Black, the only part of
the sunken face that seemed alive. Harry had never met a vampire, but he
had seen pictures of them in his Defense Against the Dark Arts classes,
and Black, with his waxy white skin, looked just like one.

"Black woz a big supporter of You-Know-'Oo," he said.

"So -- so Black was a supporter of You-Know-Who?" Harry prompted
apologetically.

"-- all You-Know-"Oo's supporters was tracked down, wasn't they, Ern?
Most of 'em knew it was all over, wiv You-Know-"Oo gone, and they came
quiet. But not Sirius Black. I 'eard he thought 'e'd be
second-in-command once You-Know-"Oo 'ad taken over.

"Anyway, they cornered Black in the middle of a street full of Muggles
an' Black took out 'is wand and 'e blasted 'alf the street apart, an' a
wizard got it, an' so did a dozen Muggles what got in the way. "Orrible,
eh? An' you know what Black did then?" Stan continued in a dramatic
whisper.

"An' now 'e's out," said Stan, examining the newspaper picture of
Black's gaunt face again. "Never been a breakout from Azkaban before,
'as there, Ern? Beats me 'ow 'e did it. Frightenin', eh? Mind, I don't
fancy 'is chances against them Azkaban guards, eh, Ern?"

He, Harry, had broken wizard law just like Sirius Black. Was inflating
Aunt Marge bad enough to land him in Azkaban? Harry didn't know anything
about the wizard prison, though everyone he'd ever heard speak of it did
so in the same fearful tone. Hagrid, the Hogwarts gamekeeper, had spent
two months there only last year. Harry wouldn't soon forget the look of
terror on Hagrid's face when he had been told where he was going, and
Hagrid was one of the bravest people Harry knew.

"Have you had any luck with Black yet?" Harry asked.

Harry spent the long sunny days exploring the shops and eating under the
brightly colored umbrellas outside cafes, where his fellow diners were
showing one another their purchases ( " it , s a lunascope, old boy --
no more messing around with moon charts, see?") or else discussing the
case of Sirius Black ("personalty, I won't let any of the children out
alone until he's back in Azkaban"). Harry didn't have to do his homework
under the blankets by flashlight anymore; now he could sit in the bright
sunshine outside Florean Fortescue's Ice Cream Parlor, finishing all his
essays with occasional help from Florean Fortescue himself, who, apart
from knowing a great deal about medieval witch burnings, gave Harry free
sundaes every half an hour.

Mr. Weasley put down his paper, and Harry saw the now familiar picture
of Sirius Black staring up at him.

"Don't be ridiculous, Ron," said Mr. Weasley, who on closer inspection
looked very strained. "Black's not going to be caught by a
thirteen-year-old wizard. It's the Azkaban guards who'll get him back,
You mark my words."

"Molly, they say Sirius Black's mad, and maybe he is, but he was clever
enough to escape from Azkaban, and that's supposed to be impossible.
It's been three weeks, and no one's seen hide nor hair of him, and I
don't care what Fudge keeps telling the Daily Prophet, we're no nearer
catching Black than inventing self-spelling wands. The only thing we
know for sure is what Black's after

"We thought Azkaban was perfectly safe. If Black can break out of
Azkaban, he can break into Hogwarts."

"But no one's really sure that Black's after Harry

"Molly, how many times do I have to tell you? They didn't report it in
the press because Fudge wanted it kept quiet, but Fudge went out to
Azkaban the night Black escaped. The guards told Fudge that Blacks been
talking in his sleep for a while now. Always the same words: "He's at
Hogwarts... he's at Hogwarts." Black is deranged, Molly, and he wants
Harry dead. If you ask me, he thinks murdering Harry will bring
You-Know-Who back to pow er. Black lost everything the night Harry
stopped You- Know-Who, and he's had twelve years alone in Azkaban to
brood on that...."

"Not happy? Why shouldn't he be happy, if they're there to catch Black?"

"Dumbledore isn't fond of the Azkaban guards," said Mr. Weasley heavily.
"Nor am 1, if it comes to that... but when you're dealing with a wizard
like Black, you sometimes have to join forces with those you'd rather
avoid."

So Sirius Black was after him. This explained everything. Fudge had been
lenient with him because he was so relieved to find him alive. He'd made
Harry promise to stay in Diagon Alley where there were plenty of wizards
to keep an eye on him. And he was sending two Ministry cars to take them
all to the station tomorrow, so that the Weasleys could look after Harry
until he was on the train.

Harry lay listening to the muffled shouting next door and wondered why
he didn't feel more scared. Sirius Black had murdered thirteen people
with one curse; Mr. and Mrs, Weasley obviously thought Harry would be
panic-stricken if he knew the truth. But Harry happened to agree
wholeheartedly with Mrs. Weasley that the safest place on earth was
wherever Albus Dumbledore happened to be. Didn't people always say that
Dumbledore was the only person Lord Voldemort had ever been afraid of?
Surely Black, as Voldemort's right-hand man, would be just as frightened
of him?

And then there were these Azkaban guards everyone kept talking about.
They seemed to scare most people senseless, and if they were stationed
all around the school, Black's chances of getting inside seemed very
remote.

No, all in all, the thing that bothered Harry most was the fact that his
chances of visiting Hogsmeade now looked like zero. Nobody would want
Harry to leave the safety of the castle until Black was caught; in fact,
Harry suspected his every move would be carefully watched until the
danger had passed.

Harry explained all about Mr. and Mrs. Weasley's argument and the
warning Mr. Weasley had just given him. \When he'd finished, Ron looked
thunderstruck, and Hermione had her hands over her mouth. She finally
lowered them to say, "Sirius Black escaped to come after you? Oh,
Harry... you'll have to be really, really careful. don't go looking for
trouble, Harry --"

They were taking the news worse than Harry had expected. Both Ron and
Hermione seemed to be much more frightened of Black than he was.

"And Professor Lupin stepped over you, and walked toward the dementor,
and pulled out his wand," said Hermione, "and he said, "None of us is
hiding Sirius Black under our cloaks. Go." But the dementor didn't move,
so Lupin muttered something, and a silvery thing shot out of his wand at
it, and it turned around and sort of glided away.... "

"I'm allowed to walk across the grounds, " he said Pointedly. "Sirius
Black hasn't got past the dementors yet, has he?"

"Hey, Harry," said Seamus Finnigan, leaning over to borrow Harry's brass
scales, "have you heard? Daily Prophet this morning -- they reckon
Sirius Black's been sighted."

Black single-handed, Potter?"

"What did Malfoy mean?" Harry muttered to Ron as he stuck his hands
under the icy jet that poured from the gargoyle's mouth "Why would I
want revenge on Black? He hasn't done anything to me -- yet.

"Harry, I'm sure you'll be able to go next time," she said. "They're
bound to catch Black soon. He's been sighted once already."

"Black's not fool enough to try anything in Hogsmeade," said Ron. "Ask
McGonagall if you can go this time, Harry. The next one might not be for
ages --"

"Oh yes, Professorhead," said Peeves, with the air of one cradling a
large bombshell in his arms. "He got very angry when she wouldn't let
him in, you see." Peeves flipped over and grinned at Dumbledore from
between his own legs. "Nasty temper he's got, that Sirius Black."

"Do you think Black's still in the castle?" Hermione whispered
anxiously.

"Hiding in a map of Argyllshire on the second floor. Apparently she
refused to let Black in without the password, so he attacked. She's
still very distressed, but once she's calmed down, I'll have Mr. Filch
restore her."

"Very well, Severus. I didn't really expect Black to linger."

"It seems -- almost impossible -- that Black could have entered the
school without inside help. I did express my concerns whet, you
appointed --"

"I do not believe a single person inside this castle would have helped
Black enter it," said Dumbledore, and his tone made it so clear that the
subject was closed that Snape didn't reply. "I must go down to the
dementors," said Dumbledore. I said I would inform them when our search
was complete."

The school talked of nothing but Sirius Black for the next few days. The
theories about how he had entered the castle became wilder and wilder;
Hannah Abbott, from Hufflepuff, spent much of their next Herbology class
telling anyone who'd listen that Black could turn into a flowering
shrub.

"There's no point hiding it from you any longer, Potter," she said in a
very serious voice. "I know this will come as a shock to you, but Sirius
Black --"

"D'you know what that --" (he called Snape something that made Hermione
say "Ron!") "-- is making me do? I've got to scrub out the bedpans in
the hospital wing. Without magic!" He was breathing deeply, his fists
clenched. "Why couldn't Black have hidden in Snape's office, eh? He
could have finished him off for us!"

"But Sirius Black escaped from them," Harry said slowly. "He got
away..."

"Yes," he said, straightening up, "Black must have found a way to fight
them. I wouldn't have believed it possible.... Dementors are supposed to
drain a wizard of his powers if he is left with them too long...."

"But what about Sirius Black?" Hermione hissed. "He could be using one
of the passages on that map to get into the castle! The teachers have
got to know!"

Harry hesistated. What if Black did know the passage was there?

Customers are reminded that until further notice, dementors will be
patrolling the streets of Hogsmeade every night after sundown. This
measure has been put in place for the safety of Hogsmeade residents and
will be lifted upon the recapture of Sirius Black. It is therefore
advisable that you complete your shopping well before nightfall.

"See?" said Ron quietly. "I'd like to see Black try and break into
Honeydukes with dementors swarming all over the village. Anyway,
Hermione, the Honeydukes owners would hear a break-in, wouldn't they?
They live over the shop!"

"Yes, but but --" Hermoine seemed to be struggling to find another
problem. "Look, Harry still shouldn't be coming into Hogsmeade. He
hasn't got a signed form! If anyone finds out, he'll be in so much
trouble! And it's not nightfall yet -- what if Sirius Black turns up
today? Now?"

Harry saw the lower part of Fudge's thick body twist in his chair as
though he were checking for eavesdroppers. Then he said in a quiet
voice, "What else, m'dear, but Sirius Black? I daresay you heard what
happened up at the school at Halloween?"

"Do you think Blacks still in the area, Minister?" whispered Madam
Rosmerta.

"All the same," demurred Fudge, "they are here to protect you all from
something much worse.... We all know what Black's capable of..."

"Do you know, I still have trouble believing it," said Madam Rosmerta
thoughtfully. "Of all the people to go over to the Dark Side, Sirius
Black was the last I'd have thought... I mean, I remember him when he
was a boy at Hogwarts. If you'd told me then what he was going to
become, I'd have said you'd had too much mead."

"Naturally," said Madam Rosmerta, with a small laugh. "Never saw one
without the other, did you? The number of times I had them in here --
ooh, they used to make me laugh. Quite the double act, Sirius Black and
James Potter!"

"Precisely," said Professor McGonagall. "Black and Potter. Ringleaders
of their little gang. Both very bright, of course -- exceptionally
bright, in fact -- but I don't think we've ever had such a pair of
troublemakers --"

"You'd have thought Black and Potter were brothers!" chimed in Professor
Flitwick. "Inseparable!"

"Of course they were," said Fudge. "Potter trusted Black beyond all his
other friends. Nothing changed when they left school. Black was best man
when James married Lily. Then they named him godfather to Harry. Harry
has no idea, of course. You can imagine how the idea would torment him."

"Because Black turned out to be in league with You-Know-Who?" whispered
Madam Rosmerta.

"So Black was the Potters' Secret-Keeper?" whispered Madam Rosmerta.

"Naturally," said Professor McGonagall. "James Potter told Dumbledore
that Black would die rather than tell where they were, that Black was
planning to go into hiding himself... and yet, Dumbledore remained
worried. I remember him offering to be the Potters' Secret-Keeper
himself."

"He suspected Black?" gasped Madam Rosmerta.

"But James Potter insisted on using Black?"

"He did," said Fudge heavily. "And then, barely a week after the
Fidelius Charm had been performed --" "Black betrayed them?" breathed
Madam Rosmerta.

"He did indeed. Black was tired of his double-agent role, he was ready
to declare his support openly for You-Know-Who, and he seems to have
planned this for the moment of the Potters' death. But, as we all know,
You-Know-Who met his downfall in little Harry Potter. Powers gone,
horribly weakened, he fled. And this left Black in a very nasty position
indeed. His master had fallen at the very moment when he, Black, had
shown his true colors as a traitor. He had no choice but to run for it
--"

"I met him!" growled Hagrid. "I musta bin the last ter see him before he
killed all them people! It was me what rescued Harry from Lily an'
James's house after they was killed! jus' got him outta the ruins, poor
little thing, with a great slash across his forehead, an' his parents
dead... an' Sirius Black turns up, on that flyin' motorbike he used ter
ride. Never occurred ter me what he was doin' there. I didn' know he'd
bin Lily an' James's Secret-Keeper. Thought he'd jus' heard the news o'
You-Know-Who's attack an' come ter see what he could do. White an'
shakin', he was. An' yeh know what I did? I COMFORTED THE MURDERIN'
TRAITOR!" Hagrid roared.

"How was I ter know he wasn' upset abou' Lily an' James? It was
You-Know-Who he cared abou'! An' then he says, "Give Harry ter me,
Hagrid, I'm his godfather, I'll look after him --' Ha! But I'd had me
orders from Dumbledore, an' I told Black no, Dumbledore said Harry was
ter go ter his aunt an' uncle's. Black argued, but in the end he gave
in. Told me ter take his motorbike ter get Harry there. "I won't need it
anymore," he says.

"I shoulda known there was somethin' fishy goin' on then. He loved that
motorbike, what was he givin' it ter me for? Why wouldn' he need it
anymore? Fact was, it was too easy ter trace. Dumbledore knew he'd bin
the Potters' Secret-Keeper. Black knew he was goin' ter have ter run fer
it that night, knew it was a matter o' hours before the Ministry was
after him.

"Alas, if only we had," said Fudge bitterly. "It was not we who found
him. It was little Peter Pettigrew -- another of the Potters' friends.
Maddened by grief, no doubt, and knowing that Black had been the
Potters' Secret-Keeper, he went after Black himself."

"Hero-worshipped Black and Potter," said Professor McGonagall. "Never
quite in their league, talent-wise. I was often rather ,harp with him.
You can imagine how I -how I regret that now..." She sounded as though
she had a sudden head cold.

"There, now, Minerva," said Fudge kindly, "Pettigrew died a hero's
death. Eyewitnesses -- Muggles, of course, we wiped their, memories
later -- told us how Pettigrew cornered Black. They say he was sobbing,
"Lily and James, Sirius! How could you?" And then he went for his wand.
Well, of course, Black was quicker. Blew Pettigrew to smithereens...."

"I tell yeh, if I'd got ter Black before little Pettigrew did, I
wouldn't 've messed around with wands -- I'd 've ripped him limb -- from
-- limb," Hagrid growled.

"You don't know what you're talking about, Hagrid," said Fudge sharply.
"Nobody but trained Hit Wizards from the Magical Law Enforcement Squad
would have stood a chance against Black once he was cornered. I was
Junior Minister in the Department of Magical Catastrophes at the time,
and I was one of the first on the scene after Black murdered all those
people. I -- I will never forget it. I still dream about it sometimes. A
crater in the middle of the street, so deep it had cracked the sewer
below. Bodies everywhere. Muggles screaming. And Black standing there
laughing, with what was left of Pettigrew in front of him... a heap of
bloodstained robes and a few -- a few fragments --"

"Well, there you have it, Rosmerta," said Fudge thickly. "Black was
taken away by twenty members of the Magical Law Enforcement "Squad and
Pettigrew received the Order of Merlin, First Class, which I think was
some comfort to his poor mother. Blades been in Azkaban ever since."

"I wish I could say that he was," said Fudge slowly. "I certainly
believe his master's defeat unhinged him for a while. The murder of
Pettigrew and all those Muggles was the action of a cornered and
desperate man -- cruel... pointless. Yet I met Black on my last
inspection of Azkaban. You know, most of the prisoners in there sit
muttering to themselves in the dark; there's no sense in them... but I
was shocked at how normal Black seemed. He spoke quite rationally to me.
It was unnerving. You'd have thought he was merely bored -- asked if I'd
finished with my newspaper, cool as you please, said he missed doing the
crossword. Yes, I was astounded at how little effect the dementors
seemed to be having on him -- and he was one of the most heavily guarded
in the place, you know. Dementors outside his door day and night."

I daresay that is his -- er -- eventual plan," said Fudge evasively.
"But we hope to catch Black long before that. I must say, You-Know-Who
alone and friendless is one thing... but give him back his most devoted
servant, and I shudder to think how quickly he'll rise again...."

If he hadn't known it was the same person, he would never have guessed
it was Black in this old photograph. His face wasn't sunken and waxy,
but handsome, full of laughter. Had he already been working for
Voldemort when this picture had been taken? Was he already planning the
deaths of the two people next to him? Did he realize he was facing
twelve years in Azkaban, twelve years that would make him
unrecognizable?

A hatred such as he had never known before was coursing through Harry
like poison. He could see Black laughing at him through the darkness, as
though somebody had pasted the picture from the album over his eyes. He
watched, as though somebody was playing him a piece of film, Sirius
Black blasting Peter Pettigrew (who resembled Neville Longbottom) into a
thousand pieces. He could hear (though having no idea what Black's voice
might sound like) a low, excited mutter. "It has happened, My Lord...
the Potters have made me their Secret-Keeper and then came another
voice, laughing shrilly, the same laugh that Harry heard inside his head
whenever the dementors drew near....

"Like trying to go after Black," said Ron sharply.

"Because Black's not worth dying for," said Ron.

"There's nothing you can do!" said Hermione, looking stricken. "The
dementors will catch Black and he'll go back to Azkaban and -- and serve
him right!"

"You heard what Fudge said. Black isn't affected by Azkaban like normal
people are. It's not a punishment for him like it is for the others."

"So what are you saying?" said Ron, looking very tense. "You want to --
to kill Black or something?"

Again, Harry didn't answer. He didn't know what he wanted to do. All he
knew was that the idea of doing nothing, while Black was at liberty, was
almost more than he could stand.

"You're going to take Malfoy's advice instead of ours?" said Ron
furiously. "Listen... you know what Pettigrew's mother got back after
Black had finished with him? Dad told me -- the Order of Merlin, First
Class, and Pettigrew's finger in a box. That was the biggest bit of him
they could find. Black's a madman, Harry, and he's dangerous --"

"-- so obviously, the Malfoys knew Black was working for Voldemort --"

"Harry, please," said Hermione, her eyes now shining with tears, "Please
be sensible. Black did a terrible, terrible thing, but d-don't Put
Yourself in danger, it's what Black wants.... Oh, Harry, you'd be
Playing right into Black's hands if you went looking for him. Your mum
and dad wouldn't want you to get hurt, would they? They'd never want you
to go looking for Black!"

"I'll never know what they'd have wanted, because thanks to Black, I've
never spoken to them," said Harry shortly.

"Yeah, let's go," said Harry, sitting up, "and I can ask him how come he
never mentioned Black when he told me all about my parents!"

Further discussion of Sirius Black plainly wasn't what Ron had had in
mind.

"He's done more'n enough fer me already," groaned Hagrid. "Got enough on
his plate what with keepin' them dementors outta the castle, an' Sirius
Black lurkin' around --"

Ron and Hermione looked quickly at Harry, as though expecting him to
start berating Hagrid for not telling him the truth about Black. But
Harry couldn't bring himself to do it, not now that he saw Hagrid so
miserable and scared.

The trip to Hagrid's, though far from fun, had nevertheless had the
effect Ron and Hermione had hoped. Though Harry had by no means
forgotten about Black, he couldn't brood constantly on revenge if he
wanted to help Hagrid win his case against the Committee for the
Disposal of Dangerous Creatures. He, Ron, and Hermione went to the
library the next day and returned to the empty common room laden with
books that might help prepare a defense for Buckbeak. The three of them
sat in front of the roaring fire, slowly turning the pages of dusty
volumes about famous cases If marauding beasts, speaking occasionally
when they ran across something relevant.

"Because I thought -- and Professor McGonagall agrees with me -- that
that broom was probably sent to Harry by Sirius Black!"

"Sirius Black" Harry said wearily. "He's supposed to be after me. So
McGonagall reckons he might have sent it."

Waving aside the information that a famous murderer was after his
Seeker, Wood said, "But Black couldn't have bought a Firebolt! He's on
the run! The whole country's on the lookout for him! How could he just
walk into Quality Quidditch Supplies and buy a broomstick?"

"Professor Lupin?" he said. "If you knew my dad, you must've known
Sirius Black as well."

Harry left the classroom, walking along the corridor and around a
corner, then took a detour behind a suit of armor and sank down on its
plinth to finish his chocolate, wishing he hadn't mentioned Black, as
Lupin was obviously not keen on the subject. Then Harry's thoughts
wandered back to his mother and father...

Lupin drank a little more butterbeer, then said, "It's the fate that
awaits Sirius Black. It was in the Daily Prophet this morning. The
Ministry have given the dementors permission to perform it if they find
him."

Harry sat stunned for a moment at the idea of someone having their soul
sucked out through their mouth. But then he thought of Black.

He would have liked to have told Lupin about the conversation he'd
overheard about Black in the Three Broomsticks, about Black betraying
his mother and father, but it would have involved revealing that he'd
gone to Hogsmeade without permission, and he knew Lupin wouldn't be very
impressed by that. So he finished his butterbeer, thanked Lupin, and
left the History of Magic classroom.

"Black! Sirius Black! With a knife!"

"Perce -- Sirius Black!" said Ron faintly. "In our dormitory! With a
knife! Woke me up!"

No one in Gryffindor Tower slept that night. They knew that the castle
was being searched again, and the whole House stayed awake in the common
room, waiting to hear whether Black had been caught. Professor
McGonagall came back at dawn, to tell them that he had again escaped.

Throughout the day, everywhere they went they saw signs of tighter
security; Professor Flitwick could be seen teaching the front doors to
recognize a large picture of Sirius Black; Filch was suddenly bustling
up and down the corridors, boarding up everything from tiny cracks in
the walls to mouse holes. Sir Cadogan had been fired. His portrait had
been taken back to its lonely landing on the seventh floor, and the Fat
Lady was back. She had been expertly restored, but was still extremely
nervous, and had agreed to return to her job only on condition that she
was given extra protection. A bunch of surly security trolls had been
hired to guard her. They paced the corridor in a menacing group, talking
in grunts and comparing the size of their clubs.

Harry had been wondering the same thing. Why had Black, having got the
wrong bed, not silenced Ron and proceeded to Harry? Black had proved
twelve years ago that he didn't mind murdering innocent people, and this
time he had been facing five unarmed boys, four of whom were asleep.

Neville was in total disgrace. Professor McGonagall was so furious with
him she had banned him from all future Hogsmeade visits, given him a
detention, and forbidden anyone to give him the password into the tower.
Poor Neville was forced to wait. outside the common room every night for
somebody to let him in, while the security trolls leered unpleasantly at
him. None of these punishments, however, came close to matching the one
his grandmother had in store for him. Two days after Black's break-in,
she sent Neville the very worst thing a Hogwarts student could receive
over breakfast -- a Howler.

"He probably wants to hear all about Black!" said Ron.

"Really upset, she was, when Black nearly stabbed yeh, Ron. She's got
her heart in the right place, Hermione has, an' you two not talkin' to
her --"

"Ron, how can you let him go with you? After what Sirius Black nearly
did to you! I mean it, I'll tell --"

"So," he said, straightening up again. "Everyone from the Minister of
Magic downward has been trying to keep famous Harry Potter safe from
Sirius Black. But famous Harry Potter is a law unto himself Let the
ordinary people worry about his safety! Famous Harry Potter goes where
he wants to, with no thought for the consequences.

"Don't expect me to cover up for you again, Harry. I cannot make you
take Sirius Black seriously. But I would have thought that what you have
heard when the dementors draw near you would have had more of an effect
on you. Your parents gave their lives to keep you alive, Harry. A poor
way to repay them -- gambling their sacrifice for a bag of magic
tricks."

The safety measures imposed on the students since Black's second
break-in made it impossible for Harry, Ron, and Hermione to go and visit
Hagrid in the evenings. Their only chance of talking to him was during
Care of Magical Creatures lessons.

"I'm here on an unpleasant mission, Harry. The Committee for the
Disposal of Dangerous Creatures required a witness to the execution of a
mad hippogriff. As I needed to visit Hogwarts to check on the Black
situation, I was asked to step in."

A mass of filthy, matted hair hung to his elbows. If eyes hadn't been
shining out of the deep, dark sockets, he might have been a corpse. The
waxy skin was stretched so tightly over the bones of his face, it looked
like a skull. His yellow teeth were bared in a grin. It was Sirius
Black.

Harry's and Hermione's wands shot out of their hands, high in the air,
and Black caught them. Then he took a step closer. His eyes were fixed
on Harry.

The taunt about his father rang in Harry's ears as though Black had
bellowed it. A boiling hate erupted in Harry's chest, leaving no place
for fear. For the first time in his life, he wanted his wand back in his
hand, not to defend himself, but to attack... to kill. Without knowing
what he was doing, he started forward, but there was a sudden movement
on either side of him and two pairs of hands grabbed him and held him
back.... "No, Harry!" Hermione gasped in a petrified whisper; Ron,
however, spoke to Black.

Something flickered in Black's shadowed eyes.

He had forgotten about magic -- he had forgotten that he was short and
skinny and thirteen, whereas Black was a tall, full-grown man -- all
Harry knew was that he wanted to hurt Black as badly as he could and
that he didn't care how much he got hurt in return --

Perhaps it was the shock of Harry doing something so stupid, but Black
didn't raise the wands in time -- one of Harry's hands fastened over his
wasted wrist, forcing the wand tips away; the knuckles of Harry's other
hand collided with the side of Black's head and they fell, backward,
into the wall -

Hermione was screaming; Ron was yelling; there was a blinding flash as
the wands in Black's hand sent a jet of sparks into the air that missed
Harry's face by inches; Harry felt the shrunken arm under his fingers
twisting madly, but he clung on, his other hand punching every part of
Black it could find.

But Black's free hand had found Harry's throat

Then he saw Hermione's foot swing out of nowhere. Black let go of Harry
with a grunt of pain; Ron had thrown himself on Black's wand hand and
Harry heard a faint clatter --

Black was sprawled at the bottom of the wall. His thin chest rose and
fell rapidly as he watched Harry walking slowly nearer, his wand
pointing straight at Black's heart.

Harry stopped right above him, his wand still pointing at Black's chest,
looking down at him. A livid bruise was rising around Black's left eye
and his nose was bleeding.

Black stared up at him out of those sunken eyes.

"You've got to listen to me," Black said, and there was a note of
urgency in his voice now. "You'll regret it if you don't.... You don't
understand...."

Before either of them could say another word, something ginger streaked
past Harry; Crookshanks leapt onto Black's chest and settled himself
there, right over Black's heart. Black blinked and looked down at the
cat.

But Crookshanks sank his claws into Black's robes and wouldn't shift. He
turned his ugly, squashed face to Harry and looked up at him with those
great yellow eyes. To his right, Hermione gave a dry sob.

Harry stared down at Black and Crookshanks, his grip tightening on the
wand. So what if he had to kill the cat too? It was in league with
Black.... If it was prepared to die, trying to protect Black, that
wasn't Harry's business.... If Black wanted to save it, that only proved
he cared more for Crookshanks than for Harry's parents....

Harry raised the wand. Now was the moment to do it. Now was the moment
to avenge his mother and father. He was going to kill Black. He had to
kill Black. This was his chance....

The seconds lengthened. And still Harry stood frozen there, wand poised,
Black staring up at him, Crookshanks on his chest. Ron's ragged
breathing came from near the bed; Hermione was quite silent.

Black made a startled movement that almost dislodged Crookshanks; Harry
gripped his wand convulsively -- Do it now! said a voice in his head --
but the footsteps were thundering up the stairs and Harry still hadn't
done it.

The door of the room burst open in a shower of red sparks and Harry
wheeled around as Professor Lupin came hurtling into the room, his face
bloodless, his wand raised and ready. His eyes flickered over Ron, lying
on the floor, over Hermione, cowering next to the door, to Harry,
standing there with his wand covering Black, and then to Black himself,
crumpled and bleeding at Harry's feet.

Harry's wand flew once more out of his hand; so did the two Hermione was
holding. Lupin caught them all deftly, then moved into the room, staring
at Black, who still had Crookshanks lying Protectively across his chest.

Harry stood there, feeling suddenly empty. He hadn't done it. His nerve
had failed him. Black was going to be handed back to the dementors.

Harry looked quickly at Lupin. He didn't understannd what Lupin meant.
Who was Lupin talking about? He turned to look at Black again.

Black's face was quite expressionless. For a few seconds, he didn't move
at all. Then, very slowly, he raised his empty hand and pointed straight
at Ron. Mystified, Harry glanced around at Ron, who looked bewildered.

"But then..." Lupin muttered, staring at Black so intently it seemed he
was trying to read his mind, "... why hasn't he shown himself before
now? Unless" -- Lupin's eyes suddenly widened, as though he was seeing
something beyond Black, something none of the rest could see, "-- unless
he was the one... unless you switched... without telling me?"

Very slowly, his sunken gaze never leaving Lupin's face, Black nodded.

But he never finished the question, because what he saw made his voice
die in his throat. Lupin was lowering his wand, gazing fixed at Black.
The Professor walked to Black's side, seized his hand, pulled him to his
feet so that Crookshanks fell to the floor, and embraced Black like a
brother.

Lupin let go of Black and turned to her. She had raised herself off the
floor and was pointing at Lupin, wild-eyed. "You -- you --"

"NO!" Hermione screamed. "Harry, don't trust him, he's been helping
Black get into the castle, he wants you dead too -- he's a werewolf!"

"AND HE WAS WRONG!" Harry yelled. "YOUVE BEEN HELPING HIM ALL THE TIME!"
He was pointing at Black, who suddenly crossed to the four-poster bed
and sank onto it, his face hidden in one shaking hand. Crookshanks leapt
up beside him and stepped onto his lap, purring. Ron edged away from
both of them, dragging his leg.

"If you haven't been helping him," he said, with a furious glance at
Black, "how did you know he was here?"

"And then I saw another dot, moving fast toward you, labeled Sirius
Black.... I saw him collide with you; I watched as he pulled two of you
into the Whomping Willow --"

Ron hesitated, then put a hand inside his robes. Scabbers emerged,
thrashing desperately; Ron had to seize his long bald tail to stop him
escaping. Crookshanks stood up on Black's leg and made a soft hissing
noise.

"That's not a rat," croaked Sirius Black suddenly.

"An Animagus," said Black, "by the name of Peter Pettigrew."

"Peter Pettigrew's dead!" said Harry. "He killed him twelve years ago!"
He pointed at Black, whose face twitched convulsively.

And Crookshanks was thrown to the floor as Black lunged at Scabbers; Ron
yelled with pain as Black's weight fell on his broken leg.

."Sirius, NO!" Lupin yelled, launching himself forwards and dragging
Black away from Ron again, "WAIT! You can't do it just like that -- they
need to understand -- we've got to explain --"

"We can explain afterwards!" snarled Black, trying to throw Lupin off.
One hand was still clawing the air as it tried to reach Scabbers, who
was squealing like a piglet, scratching Ron's face and neck as he tried
to escape.

"They've -- got -- a -- right -- to -- know -- -everything!" Lupin
panted, still trying to restrain Black. "Ron's kept him as a pet! There
are parts of it even I don't understand, and Harry -- you owe Harry the
truth, Sirius!"

Black stopped struggling, though his hollowed eyes were still fixed on
Scabbers, who was clamped tightly under Ron's bitten, scratched, ad
bleeding hands.

"All right, then," Black said, without taking his eyes off the rat.

"HE'S NOT PETER, HE"S SCABBERS!" Ron yelled, trying to fore the rat back
into his front pocket, but Scabbers was fighting to hard; Ron swayed and
overbalanced, and Harry caught him am pushed him back down to the bed.
Then, ignoring Black, Harry turned to Lupin.

"They didn't see what they thought they saw!" said Black savagely, still
watching Scabbers struggling in Ron's hands.

Harry looked down at Ron, and as their eyes met, they agreed, silently:
Black and Lupin were both out of their minds. Their story made no sense
whatsoever. How could Scabbers be Peter Pettigrew? Azkaban must have
unhinged Black after all -- but why was Lupin playing along with him?

"I you're going to tell them the story, get a move on, Remus," said
Black, who was still watching Scabbers's every desperate move. "I've
waited twelve years, I'm not going to wait much longer."

"But apart from my transformations, I was happier than I had ever been
in my life. For the first time ever, I had friends, three great friends.
Sirius Black... Peter Pettigrew... and, of course, your father, Harry --
James Potter."

"Hurry up, Remus," snarled Black, who was still watching Scabbers with a
horrible sort of hunger on his face.

"Snape?" said Black harshly, taking his eyes off Scabbers; for the first
time in minutes and looking up at Lupin. "What's Snape got to do with
it?"

Black made a derisive noise.

Hermione screamed. Black leapt to his feet. Harry felt as though he'd
received a huge electric shock.

"I've told the headmaster again and again that you're helping your old
friend Black into the castle, Lupin, and here's the proof. Not even I
dreamed you would have the nerve to use this old place as your hideout
--"

BANG! Thin, snakelike cords burst from the end of Snape's wand and
twisted themselves around Lupin's mouth, wrists, and ankles; he
overbalanced and fell to the floor, unable to move. With a roar of rage,
Black started toward Snape, but Snape pointed his wand straight between
Black's eyes.

Black stopped dead. It would have been impossible to say which face
showed more hatred.

"KEEP QUIET, YOU STUPID GIRL!" Snape shouted, looking suddenly quite
deranged. "DON'T TALK ABOUT WHAT YOU DON"T UNDERSTAND!" A few sparks
shot out of the end of his wand, which was still pointed at Black's
face. Hermione fell silent.

"Vengeance is very sweet," Snape breathed at Black. "How I hoped I would
be the one to catch you...."

"The joke's on you again, Severus," Black snarled. "As long as this boy
brings his rat up to the castle" -- he jerked his head at Ron -- "I'll
come quietly...."

"Up to the castle?" said Snape silkily. "I don't think we need to go
that far. All I have to do is call the dementors once we get out of the
Willow. They'll be very pleased to see you, Black... pleased enough to
give you a little kiss, I daresay... I --"

What little color there was in Blacks face left it.

"Professor Lupin could have killed me about a hundred times this year,"
Harry said. "I've been alone with him loads of times, having defense
lessons against the dementors. If he was helping Black, why didn't he
just finish me off then?"

"SILENCE! I WILL NOT BE SPOKEN TO LIKE THAT!" Snape shrieked, looking
madder than ever. "Like father, like son, Potter! I have just saved your
neck; you should be thanking me on bended knee! You would have been well
served if he'd killed you! You'd have died like your father, too
arrogant to believe you might be mistaken in Black -- now get out of the
way, or I will make you. GET OUT OF THE WAY, POTTER!"

"You shouldn't have done that," said Black, looking at Harry.

Harry avoided Black's eyes. He wasn't sure, even now, that he'd done the
right thing.

Lupin was struggling against his bonds. Black bent down quickly and
untied him. Lupin straightened up, rubbing his arms where the ropes had
cut into them.

"You know, Sirius, that's a fair question," said Lupin, turning to Black
and frowning slightly. "How did you find out where he was?"

Black put one of his clawlike hands inside his robes and took out a
crumpled piece of paper, which he smoothed flat and held out to show the
others.

"How did you get this?" Lupin asked Black, thunderstruck.

"Fudge," said Black. "When he came to inspect Azkaban last year, he gave
me his paper. And there was Peter, on the front page on this boy's
shoulder... I knew him at once... how many times had I seen him
transform? And the caption said the boy would be going back to
Hogwarts... to where Harry was...

"He's got a toe missing," said Black.

"Just before he transformed," said Black. "When I cornered him, he
yelled for the whole street to hear that I'd betrayed Lily and James.
Then, before I could curse him, he blew apart the street with the wand
behind his back, killed everyone within twenty feet of himself -- and
sped down into the sewer with the other rats...."

But that wasn't right, Harry thought suddenly... Scabbers had been
looking ill before he met Crookshanks... ever since Ron's return from
Egypt... since the time when Black had escaped....

"This cat isn't mad," said Black hoarsely. He reached out a bony hand
and stroked Crookshanks's fluffy head. "He's the most intelligent of his
kind I've ever met. He recognized Peter for what he was right away. And
when he met me, he knew I was no dog. It was a while before he trusted
me.... Finally, I managed to communicate to him what I was after, and
he's been helping me. .. "What do you mean?" breathed Hermione.

"But Peter got wind of what was going on and ran for it." croaked Black.
"This cat -- Crookshanks, did you call him? -- told me Peter had left
blood on the sheets.... I supposed he bit himself... Well, faking his
own death had worked once."

"Yes, I have," said Black, with an evil look at Scabbers.

He was pointing at Black, who shook his head slowly; the sunken eyes
were suddenly over bright.

Black had already retrieved Snape's wand from the bed. He approached
Lupin and the struggling rat, and his wet eyes suddenly seemed to be
burning in his face.

Black's wand arm rose, but Lupin seized him around the wrist, gave him a
warning took, then turned again to Pettigrew, his voice light and
casual.

"He's come to try and kill me again!" Pettigrew squeaked suddenly,
pointing at Black, and Harry saw that he used his middle finger, because
his index was missing. "He killed Lily and James and now he's going to
kill me too.... You've got to help me, Remus...."

Black's face looked more skull-like than ever as he stared at Pettigrew
with his fathomless eyes.

Black started to laugh, a horrible, mirthless laugh that filled the
whole room.

Pettigrew flinched as though Black had brandished a whip at him.

"What, scared to hear your old master's name?" said Black. I don't blame
you, Peter. His lot aren't very happy with you, are they?"

"You haven't been hiding from me for twelve years," said Black. "You've
been hiding from Voldemort's old supporters. I heard things in Azkaban,
Peter... They all think you're dead, or you'd have to answer to them....
I've heard them screaming all sorts of things in their sleep. Sounds
like they think the double-crosser double-crossed them. Voldemort went
to the Potters' on your information... and Voldemort met his downfall
there. And not all Voldemort's supporters ended up in Azkaban, did they?
There are still plenty out here, biding their time, pretending they've
seen the error of their ways.

"Innocent, but scared!" squealed Pettigrew. "If Voldemort's supporters
were after me, it was because I put one of their best men in Azkaban --
the spy, Sirius Black!"

Black's face contorted.

"Lily and James only made you Secret-Keeper because I suggested it,"
Black hissed, so venomously that Pettigrew took a step backward. "I
thought it was the perfect plan... a bluff... Voldemort would be sure to
come after me, would never dream they'd use a weak, talentless thing
like you.... It must have been the finest moment of your miserable life,
telling Voldemort you could hand him the Potters."

"I'll tell you why," said Black. "Because you never did anything for
anyone unless you could see what was in it for you. Voldemort's been in
hiding for fifteen years, they say he's half dead. You weren't about to
commit murder right under Albus Dumbledore's nose, for a wreck of a
wizard who'd lost all of his power, were you? You'd want to be quite
sure he was the biggest bully in the playground before you went back to
him, wouldn't you? Why else did you find a wizard family to take you in?
Keeping an ear out for news, weren't YOU, Peter? Just in case your old
protector regained strength, and it was safe to rejoin him...."

"Er -- Mr. Black -- Sirius?" said Hermione.

Black jumped at being addressed like this and stared at Hermione as
though he had never seen anything quite like her.

But Lupin silenced him with a look. Black was frowning slightly at
Hermione, but not as though he were annoyed with her. He seemed to be
pondering his answer.

Pettigrew was shaking his head, mouthing noiselessly, but staring all
the while at Black as though hypnotized.

"Believe me," croaked Black. "Believe me, Harry. I never betrayed James
and Lily. I would have died before I betrayed them."

Black kicked out and Pettigrew recoiled.

"There's enough filth on my robes without you touching them," said
Black.

"Forgive me, Remus," said Black.

"Of course," said Black, and the ghost of a grin flitted across his
gaunt face. He, too, began rolling up his sleeves. "Shall we kill him
together?"

"If you made a better rat than a human, it's not much to boast about,
Peter," said Black harshly. Ron, going still paler with pain, wrenched
his broken leg out of Pettigrew's reach. Pettigrew turned on his knees,
staggered forward, and seized the hem of Hermione's robes.

"HOW DARE YOU SPEAK TO HARRY?" roared Black. "HOW DARE YOU FACE HIM? HOW
DARE YOU TALK ABOUT JAMES IN FRONT OF HIM?"

Both Black and Lupin strode forward, seized Pettigrew's shoulders, and
threw him backward onto the floor. He sat there, twitching with terror,
staring up at them.

"You sold Lily and James to Voldemort," said Black, who was shaking too.
"Do you deny it?"

"DON'T LIE!" bellowed Black. "YOU'D BEEN PASSING INFORMATION TO HIM FOR
A YEAR BEFORE LILY AND JAMES DIED! YOU WERE HIS SPY!"

"What was there to be gained by fighting the most evil wizard who has
ever existed?" said Black, with a terrible fury in his face. "Only
innocent lives, Peter!"

"THEN YOU SHOULD HAVE DIED!" roared Black. "DIED RATHER THAN BETRAY YOUR
FRIENDS, AS WE WOULD HAVE DONE FOR YOU!"

Black and Lupin stood shoulder to shoulder, wands raised.

Black and Lupin both looked staggered.

"Harry, this piece of vermin is the reason you have no parents," Black
snarled. "This cringing bit of filth would have seen you die too,
without turning a hair. You heard him. His own stinking skin meant more
to him than your whole family."

No one moved or made a sound except Pettigrew, whose breath was coming
in wheezes as he clutched his chest. Black and Lupin were looking at
each other. Then, with one movement, they lowered their wands.

"You're the only person who has the right to decide, Harry," said Black.
"But think... think what he did...."

"But if you transform, Peter," growled Black, his own wand pointing at
Pettigrew too, "we will kill you. You agree, Harry?"

"And two of us should be chained to this," said Black, nudging Pettigrew
with his toe. "Just to make sure."

Black conjured heavy manacles from thin air; soon Pettigrew was upright
again, left arm chained to Lupin's right, right arm to Ron's left. Ron's
face was set. He seemed to have taken Scabbers's true identity as a
personal insult. Crookshanks leapt lightly off the bed and led the way
out of the room, his bottlebrush tail held jauntily high.

Getting back into the tunnel was difficult. Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron
had to turn sideways to manage it; Lupin still had Pettigrew covered
with his wand. Harry could see them edging awkwardly along the tunnel in
single file. Crookshanks was still in the lead. Harry went right after
Black, who was still making Snape drift along ahead of them; he kept
bumping his lolling head on the low ceiling. Harry had the impression
Black was making no effort to prevent this.

"You know what this means?" Black said abruptly to Harry as they made
their slow progress along the tunnel. "Turning Pettigrew in?"

"Yes...," said Black. "But I'm also -- I don't know if anyone ever told
you -- I'm your godfather."

"Well... your parents appointed me your guardian," said Black stiffly.
"If anything happened to them..."

Harry waited. Did Black mean what he thought he meant?

"I'll understand, of course, if you want to stay with your aunt and
uncle," said Black. "But... well... think about it. Once my name's
cleared... if you wanted a... a different home..."

"Of course, I thought you wouldn't want to," said Black quickly. "I
understand, I just thought I'd --"

"Are you insane?" said Harry, his voice easily as croaky as Black's.

Black turned right around to look at him; Snape's head was scraping the
ceiling but Black didn't seem to care.

Black's gaunt face broke into the first true smile Harry had seen upon
it. The difference it made was startling, as though a person ten years
younger were shining through the starved mask; for a moment, he was
recognizable as the man who had laughed at Harry's parents' wedding.

Black saw Snape up through the hole, then stood back for Harry and
Hermione to pass. At last, all of them were out.

The grounds were very dark now; the only light came from the distant
windows of the castle. Without a word, they set off. Pettigrew was still
wheezing and occasionally whimpering. Harry's mind was buzzing. He was
going to leave the Dursleys. He was going to live with Sirius Black, his
parents' best friend.... He felt dazed.... What would happen when he
told the Dursleys he was going to live with the convict they'd seen on
television... !

Silently they tramped through the grounds, the castle lights growing
slowly larger. Snape was still drifting weirdly ahead of Black, his chin
bumping on his chest. And then -

Snape collided with Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron, who had stopped abruptly.
Black froze. He flung out one arm to make Harry and Hermione stop.

"Run," Black whispered. "Run. Now."

But Harry couldn't run. Ron was chained to Pettigrew and Lupin. He leapt
forward but Black caught him around the chest and threw him back.

Black was bleeding; there were gashes across his muzzle and back, but at
Harry's words he scrambled up again, and in an instant, the sound of his
paws faded to silence as he pounded away across the grounds.

Harry looked desperately around. Black and Lupin both gone... they had
no one but Snape for company, still hanging, unconscious, in midair.

He had a moment's indecision, but there was nothing they could do for
Ron at the moment, and by the sound of it, Black was in trouble --

He forced himself to think of Black, and only Black, and began to chant:
"Expecto patronum! Expecto patronum!"

Black gave a shudder, rolled over, and lay motionless on the ground,
pale as death.

Something was driving the dementors back.... It was circling around him
and Black and Hermione.... They were leaving....

"Nasty cut you've got there.... Black's work, I suppose?"

"Black had bewitched them, I saw it immediately. A Confundus Charm, to
judge by their behavior. They seemed to think there was a possibility he
was innocent. They weren't responsible for their actions. On the other
hand, their interference might have permitted Black to escape.... They
obviously thought they were going to catch Black single-handed. They've
got away with a great deal before now... I'm afraid it's given them a
rather high opinion of themselves... and of course Potter has always
been allowed an extraordinary amount of license by the headmaster --"

"Extraordinary. And yet Black, and Harry, and the girl --"

"All unconscious by the time I reached them. I bound and gagged Black,
naturally, conjured stretchers, and brought them all straight back to
the castle."

"Potter," said Madam Pomfrey soothingly, "it's all right. They've got
Black. He's locked away upstairs. The dementors will be performing the
kiss any moment now --"

"Minister, listen!" Harry said. "Sirius Black's innocent! Peter
Pettigrew faked his own death! We saw him tonight! You can't let the
dementors do that thing to Sirius, he's --"

"You see, Minister?" said Snape. "Confunded, both of them.... Black's
done a very good job on them...." "WE'RE NOT CONFUNDED!" Harry roared.

"Professor Dumbledore, Sirius Black --"

"My apologies, Poppy, but I need a word with Mr. Potter and Miss
Granger," said Dumbledore calmly. "I have just been talking to Sirius
Black --"

"That, indeed, is Black's story," said Dumbledore, surveying Snape
closely through his half-moon spectacles.

"You surely don't believe a word of Black's story?" Snape whispered, his
eyes fixed on Dumbledore's face.

"Sirius Black showed he was capable of murder at the age of sixteen," he
breathed. "You haven't forgotten that, Headmaster? You haven't forgotten
that he once tried to kill me?"

"Professor, Black's telling the truth -- we saw Pettigrew "-- he escaped
when Professor Lupin turned into a werewolf --"

"It is your turn to listen, and I beg you will not interrupt me, because
there is very little time," he said quietly. "There is not a shred of
proof to support Black's story, except your word -- and the word of two
thirteen-year-old wizards will not convince anybody. A street full of
eyewitnesses swore they saw Sirius murder Pettigrew. I myself gave
evidence to the Ministry that Sirius had been the Potters'
Secret-Keeper."

She and Harry got to their feet. Buckbeak raised his head. They saw
Lupin, Ron, and Pettigrew clambering awkwardly out of the hole in the
roots. Then came Hermione... then the unconscious Snape, drifting
weirdly upward. Next came Harry and Black. They all began to walk toward
the castle.

Together they peered around the bush at the other bank. Snape had
regained consciousness. He was conjuring stretchers and lifting the limp
forms of Harry, Hermione, and Black onto them. A fourth stretcher, no
doubt bearing Ron, was already floating at his side. Then, wand held out
in front of him, he moved them away toward the castle.

Black looked up. Harry saw his jaw drop. He leapt from his chair,
hurried to the window and tried to open it, but it was locked.

"How -- how --?" said Black weakly, staring at the hippogriff

Black placed a hand on either side of the window frame and heaved his
head and shoulders out of it. It was very lucky he was so thin. In
seconds, he had managed to fling one leg over Buckbeak's back and pull
himself onto the hippogriff behind Hermione.

But Black was still staring down at Harry.

Black wheeled Buckbeak around, facing the open sky.

"As soon as Macnair returns with the dementors. This whole Black affair
has been highly embarrassing. I can't tell you how much I'm looking
forward to informing the Daily Prophet that we've got him at last.... I
daresay they'll want to interview you, Snape... and once young Harry's
back in his right mind, I expect he'll want to tell the Prophet exactly
how you saved him...."

"He's not the only one!" puffed Fudge. "The Daily Prophet's going to
have a field day! We had Black cornered and he slipped through our
fingers yet again! All it needs now is for the story of that
hippogriff's escape to get out, and I'll be a laughingstock! Well... I'd
better go and notify the Ministry.....

"Know I shouldn' feel happy, after wha' happened las' night," he said.
"I mean, Black escapin' again, an, everythin' -- but guess what?"

I, Sirius Black, Harry Potter's godfather, hereby give him permission to
visit Hogsmeade on weekends.

