They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the
sun. (IF you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.)
`Up, lazy thing!" said the Queen, `and take this young lady to
see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and
see after some executions I have ordered'; and she walked off,
leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like
the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would
be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the
Queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled. `What fun!"
said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

`Why, SHE," said the Gryphon. `It's all her fancy, that: they
never executes nobody, you know. Come on!"

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the
distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and,
as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart
would break. She pitied him deeply. `What is his sorrow?" she
asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, `It's all his fancy, that: he hasn't got
no sorrow, you know. Come on!"

`This here young lady," said the Gryphon, `she wants for to
know your history, she do."

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only
by an occasional exclamation of `Hjckrrh!" from the Gryphon, and
the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very
nearly getting up and saying, `Thank you, sir, for your
interesting story," but she could not help thinking there MUST be
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.

`You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question," added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, `Drive on, old fellow!
Don't be all day about it!" and he went on in these words:

`Hold your tongue!" added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak
again. The Mock Turtle went on.

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. `What! Never
heard of uglifying!" it exclaimed. `You know what to beautify is,
I suppose?"

`Well, then," the Gryphon went on, `if you don't know what to
uglify is, you ARE a simpleton."

`Well, I can't show it you myself," the Mock Turtle said: `I'm
too stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it."

`Hadn't time," said the Gryphon: `I went to the Classics
master, though. He was an old crab, HE was."

`So he did, so he did," said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn;
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.

`That's the reason they're called lessons," the Gryphon
remarked: `because they lessen from day to day."

`That's enough about lessons," the Gryphon interrupted in a
very decided tone: `tell her something about the games now."

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper
across his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for
a minute or two sobs choked his voice. `Same as if he had a bone
in his throat," said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him
and punching him in the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered
his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on
again:--

`Why," said the Gryphon, `you first form into a line along the sea-shore--'

`THAT generally takes some time," interrupted the Gryphon.

`Each with a lobster as a partner!" cried the Gryphon.

`--change lobsters, and retire in same order," continued the
Gryphon.

`The lobsters!" shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

`Swim after them!" screamed the Gryphon.

`Change lobster's again!" yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

`Come, let's try the first figure!" said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon. `We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall
sing?"

`Oh, YOU sing," said the Gryphon. `I've forgotten the words."

`You're wrong about the crumbs," said the Mock Turtle:
`crumbs would all wash off in the sea. But they HAVE their tails
in their mouths; and the reason is--' here the Mock Turtle
yawned and shut his eyes.--`Tell her about the reason and all
that," he said to the Gryphon.

`The reason is," said the Gryphon, `that they WOULD go with
the lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So
they had to fall a long way. So they got their tails fast in
their mouths. So they couldn't get them out again. That's all."

`I can tell you more than that, if you like," said the
Gryphon. `Do you know why it's called a whiting?"

`IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES." the Gryphon replied very
solemnly.

`Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?" said the Gryphon. `I
mean, what makes them so shiny?"

`Boots and shoes under the sea," the Gryphon went on in a deep
voice, `are done with a whiting. Now you know."

`Soles and eels, of course," the Gryphon replied rather
impatiently: `any shrimp could have told you that."

`I mean what I say," the Mock Turtle replied in an offended
tone. And the Gryphon added `Come, let's hear some of YOUR
adventures."

`No, no! The adventures first," said the Gryphon in an
impatient tone: `explanations take such a dreadful time."

`It's all about as curious as it can be," said the Gryphon.

`It all came different!" the Mock Turtle repeated
thoughtfully. `I should like to hear her try and repeat
something now. Tell her to begin." He looked at the Gryphon as
if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.

`Stand up and repeat "'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,"' said
the Gryphon.

`That's different from what I used to say when I was a child,"
said the Gryphon.

`She can't explain it," said the Gryphon hastily. `Go on with
the next verse."

`Go on with the next verse," the Gryphon repeated impatiently:
`it begins "I passed by his garden."'

`Yes, I think you'd better leave off," said the Gryphon: and
Alice was only too glad to do so.

`Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?" the
Gryphon went on. `Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you
a song?"

`Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,"
Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather
offended tone, `Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her
"Turtle Soup," will you, old fellow?"

`Chorus again!" cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had
just begun to repeat it, when a cry of `The trial's beginning!"
was heard in the distance.

`Come on!" cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand,
it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.

`What trial is it?" Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon
only answered `Come on!" and ran the faster, while more and more
faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the
melancholy words:--

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates.
`What are they doing?" Alice whispered to the Gryphon. `They
can't have anything to put down yet, before the trial's begun."

`They're putting down their names," the Gryphon whispered in
reply, `for fear they should forget them before the end of the
trial."

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried
by--the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the
neighbouring pool--she could hear the rattle of the teacups as
the March Hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal,
and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate
guests to execution--once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the
Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it--once
more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard's
slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable
Mock Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and
all would change to dull reality--the grass would be only
rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the
reeds--the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep-
bells, and the Queen's shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd
boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and
all thy other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the
confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing of the
cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's
heavy sobs.

