`In THAT direction," the Cat said, waving its right paw round,
`lives a Hatter: and in THAT direction," waving the other paw,
`lives a March Hare. Visit either you like: they're both mad."

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it
did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the
direction in which the March Hare was said to live. `I've seen
hatters before," she said to herself; `the March Hare will be
much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it won't be
raving mad--at least not so mad as it was in March." As she said
this, she looked up, and there was the Cat again, sitting on a
branch of a tree.

She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the
house of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house,
because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was
thatched with fur. It was so large a house, that she did not
like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand
bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high: even
then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself
`Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost wish I'd
gone to see the Hatter instead!"

There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house,
and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a
Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two
were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking
over its head. `Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse," thought Alice;
`only, as it's asleep, I suppose it doesn't mind."

`Have some wine," the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

`There isn't any," said the March Hare.

`It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being
invited," said the March Hare.

`Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?"
said the March Hare.

`Then you should say what you mean," the March Hare went on.

`You might just as well say," added the March Hare, `that "I
like what I get" is the same thing as "I get what I like"!'

`Two days wrong!" sighed the Hatter. `I told you butter
wouldn't suit the works!" he added looking angrily at the March
Hare.

`It was the BEST butter," the March Hare meekly replied.

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then
he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he
could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, `It
was the BEST butter, you know."

`Nor I," said the March Hare.

(`I only wish it was," the March Hare said to itself in a
whisper.)

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. `Not I!" he replied.
`We quarrelled last March--just before HE went mad, you know--'
(pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) `--it was at the
great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

`Suppose we change the subject," the March Hare interrupted,
yawning. `I'm getting tired of this. I vote the young lady
tells us a story."

`Tell us a story!" said the March Hare.

`Take some more tea," the March Hare said to Alice, very
earnestly.

`There's no such thing!" Alice was beginning very angrily, but
the Hatter and the March Hare went `Sh! sh!" and the Dormouse
sulkily remarked, `If you can't be civil, you'd better finish the
story for yourself."

He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the
March Hare moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather
unwillingly took the place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the
only one who got any advantage from the change: and Alice was a
good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset
the milk-jug into his plate.

`Why not?" said the March Hare.

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into
the court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. `Fourteenth of March, I
think it was," he said.

`Fifteenth," said the March Hare.

`I'm a poor man," the Hatter went on, `and most things
twinkled after that--only the March Hare said--'

`I didn"t!" the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

`I deny it!" said the March Hare.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried
by--the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the
neighbouring pool--she could hear the rattle of the teacups as
the March Hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal,
and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate
guests to execution--once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the
Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it--once
more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard's
slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable
Mock Turtle.

