The Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Complete
by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

Title: Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Complete

CHAPTER I. Civilizing Huck.Â—Miss Watson.Â—Tom Sawyer Waits.

CHAPTER IV. Huck and the Judge.Â—Superstition.

CHAPTER V. Huck's Father.Â—The Fond Parent.Â—Reform.

CHAPTER VI. He Went for Judge Thatcher.Â—Huck Decided to Leave.Â—Political
Economy.Â—Thrashing Around.

CHAPTER XI. Huck and the Woman.Â—The Search.Â—Prevarication.Â—Going to
Goshen.

CHAPTER XV. Huck Loses the Raft.Â—In the Fog.Â—Huck Finds the Raft.Â—Trash.

CHAPTER XX. Huck Explains.Â—Laying Out a Campaign.Â—Working the
CampÂ—meeting.Â—A Pirate at the CampÂ—meeting.Â—The Duke as a Printer.

CHAPTER XXVI. A Pious King.Â—The King's Clergy.Â—She Asked His
Pardon.Â—Hiding in the Room.Â—Huck Takes the Money.

CHAPTER XXVII. The Funeral.Â—Satisfying Curiosity.Â—Suspicious of
Huck,Â—Quick Sales and Small.

CHAPTER XXVIII. The Trip to England.Â—"The Brute!"Â—Mary Jane Decides to
Leave.Â—Huck Parting with Mary Jane.Â—Mumps.Â—The Opposition Line.

CHAPTER XXIX. Contested Relationship.Â—The King Explains the Loss.Â—A
Question of Handwriting.Â—Digging up the Corpse.Â—Huck Escapes.

CHAPTER THE LAST. Out of Bondage.Â—Paying the Captive.Â—Yours Truly, Huck
Finn.

Huck Stealing Away

Huck Creeps into his Window

Huck and his Father

Huck Stealing Away

Huck Creeps into his Window

Huck and his Father

"Here I is, Huck"

Huck takes the Money

The Doctor leads Huck

The King shakes Huck

Aunt Sally talks to Huck

Her sister, Miss Watson, a tolerable slim old maid, with goggles on,
had just come to live with her, and took a set at me now with a
spelling-book. She worked me middling hard for about an hour, and then
the widow made her ease up. Â I couldn't stood it much longer. Â Then for
an hour it was deadly dull, and I was fidgety. Â Miss Watson would say,
"Don't put your feet up there, Huckleberry;" and "Don't scrunch up
like that, HuckleberryÂ—set up straight;" and pretty soon she would
say, "Don't gap and stretch like that, HuckleberryÂ—why don't you try to
behave?" Â Then she told me all about the bad place, and I said I wished
I was there. She got mad then, but I didn't mean no harm. Â All I wanted
was to go somewheres; all I wanted was a change, I warn't particular.
Â She said it was wicked to say what I said; said she wouldn't say it for
the whole world; she was going to live so as to go to the good place.
Â Well, I couldn't see no advantage in going where she was going, so I
made up my mind I wouldn't try for it. Â But I never said so, because it
would only make trouble, and wouldn't do no good.

"Here's Huck Finn, he hain't got no family; what you going to do 'bout
him?"

"Oh, she'll do. Â That's all right. Â Huck can come in."

"How you talk, Huck Finn. Â Why, you'd _have_ to come when he rubbed it,
whether you wanted to or not."

"Shucks, it ain't no use to talk to you, Huck Finn. Â You don't seem to
know anything, somehowÂ—perfect saphead."

One morning I happened to turn over the salt-cellar at breakfast.
Â I reached for some of it as quick as I could to throw over my left
shoulder and keep off the bad luck, but Miss Watson was in ahead of me,
and crossed me off. She says, "Take your hands away, Huckleberry; what
a mess you are always making!" Â The widow put in a good word for me, but
that warn't going to keep off the bad luck, I knowed that well enough.
Â I started out, after breakfast, feeling worried and shaky, and
wondering where it was going to fall on me, and what it was going to be.
Â There is ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck, but this wasn't one
of them kind; so I never tried to do anything, but just poked along
low-spirited and on the watch-out.

He got to hanging around the widow's too much and so she told him at
last that if he didn't quit using around there she would make trouble
for him. Well, _wasn't_ he mad? Â He said he would show who was Huck
Finn's boss. Â So he watched out for me one day in the spring, and
catched me, and took me up the river about three mile in a skiff, and
crossed over to the Illinois shore where it was woody and there warn't
no houses but an old log hut in a place where the timber was so thick
you couldn't find it if you didn't know where it was.

By and by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking wild, and he
see me and went for me. Â He chased me round and round the place with a
clasp-knife, calling me the Angel of Death, and saying he would kill me,
and then I couldn't come for him no more. Â I begged, and told him I
was only Huck; but he laughed _such_ a screechy laugh, and roared and
cussed, and kept on chasing me up. Â Once when I turned short and
dodged under his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my
shoulders, and I thought I was gone; but I slid out of the jacket quick
as lightning, and saved myself. Pretty soon he was all tired out, and
dropped down with his back against the door, and said he would rest a
minute and then kill me. He put his knife under him, and said he would
sleep and get strong, and then he would see who was who.

"But looky here, Huck, who wuz it dat 'uz killed in dat shanty ef it
warn't you?"

"Well, dey's reasons. Â But you wouldn' tell on me ef I uz to tell you,
would you, Huck?"

"Well, I b'lieve you, Huck. Â IÂ—_I run off_."

"But mind, you said you wouldn' tellÂ—you know you said you wouldn' tell,
Huck."

"I tuck out en shin down de hill, en 'spec to steal a skift 'long de
sho' som'ers 'bove de town, but dey wuz people a-stirring yit, so I hid
in de ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for everybody to
go 'way. Well, I wuz dah all night. Â Dey wuz somebody roun' all de time.
Â "Long 'bout six in de mawnin' skifts begin to go by, en 'bout eight er
nine every skift dat went 'long wuz talkin' 'bout how yo' pap come over
to de town en say you's killed. Â Dese las' skifts wuz full o' ladies en
genlmen a-goin' over for to see de place. Â Sometimes dey'd pull up at
de sho' en take a res' b'fo' dey started acrost, so by de talk I got to
know all 'bout de killin'. Â I 'uz powerful sorry you's killed, Huck, but
I ain't no mo' now.

"It's a dead man. Â Yes, indeedy; naked, too. Â He's ben shot in de back.
I reck'n he's ben dead two er three days. Â Come in, Huck, but doan' look
at his faceÂ—it's too gashly."

"Who done it? Â We've heard considerable about these goings on down in
Hookerville, but we don't know who 'twas that killed Huck Finn."

"The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed. Â So there's a
reward out for himÂ—three hundred dollars. Â And there's a reward out for
old Finn, tooÂ—two hundred dollars. Â You see, he come to town the
morning after the murder, and told about it, and was out with 'em on the
ferryboat hunt, and right away after he up and left. Â Before night they
wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see. Â Well, next day they
found out the nigger was gone; they found out he hadn't ben seen sence
ten o'clock the night the murder was done. Â So then they put it on him,
you see; and while they was full of it, next day, back comes old Finn,
and went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the
nigger all over Illinois with. The judge gave him some, and that evening
he got drunk, and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty
hard-looking strangers, and then went off with them. Â Well, he hain't
come back sence, and they ain't looking for him back till this thing
blows over a little, for people thinks now that he killed his boy and
fixed things so folks would think robbers done it, and then he'd get
Huck's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit.
Â People do say he warn't any too good to do it. Â Oh, he's sly, I reckon.
Â If he don't come back for a year he'll be all right. Â You can't prove
anything on him, you know; everything will be quieted down then, and
he'll walk in Huck's money as easy as nothing."

"_Ain'_ dat gay? Â En what dey got to do, Huck?"

"Who? Â Me? Â Go 'long. Â Doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints. Â I reck'n I
knows sense when I sees it; en dey ain' no sense in sich doin's as
dat. De 'spute warn't 'bout a half a chile, de 'spute was 'bout a whole
chile; en de man dat think he kin settle a 'spute 'bout a whole chile
wid a half a chile doan' know enough to come in out'n de rain. Â Doan'
talk to me 'bout Sollermun, Huck, I knows him by de back."

"Dat's good! Â But he'll be pooty lonesomeÂ—dey ain' no kings here, is
dey, Huck?"

"Why, Huck, doan' de French people talk de same way we does?"

"Is a cat a man, Huck?"

"Goodness gracious, is dat you, Huck? Â En you ain' deadÂ—you ain'
drowndedÂ—you's back agin? Â It's too good for true, honey, it's too good
for true. Lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o' you. Â No, you ain'
dead! you's back agin, 'live en soun', jis de same ole HuckÂ—de same ole
Huck, thanks to goodness!"

"HuckÂ—Huck Finn, you look me in de eye; look me in de eye. Â _Hain't_ you
ben gone away?"

"But, Huck, it's all jis' as plain to me asÂ—"

"Well, den, I reck'n I did dream it, Huck; but dog my cats ef it ain't
de powerfullest dream I ever see. Â En I hain't ever had no dream b'fo'
dat's tired me like dis one."

"We's safe, Huck, we's safe! Â Jump up and crack yo' heels! Â Dat's de
good ole Cairo at las', I jis knows it!"

"Pooty soon I'll be a-shout'n' for joy, en I'll say, it's all on
accounts o' Huck; I's a free man, en I couldn't ever ben free ef it
hadn' ben for Huck; Huck done it. Â Jim won't ever forgit you, Huck;
you's de bes' fren' Jim's ever had; en you's de _only_ fren' ole Jim's
got now."

"Dah you goes, de ole true Huck; de on'y white genlman dat ever kep' his
promise to ole Jim."

"Here I is, Huck. Â Is dey out o' sight yit? Â Don't talk loud."

"I was a-listenin' to all de talk, en I slips into de river en was gwyne
to shove for sho' if dey come aboard. Â Den I was gwyne to swim to de
raf' agin when dey was gone. Â But lawsy, how you did fool 'em, Huck!
Â Dat _wuz_ de smartes' dodge! Â I tell you, chile, I'spec it save' ole
JimÂ—ole Jim ain't going to forgit you for dat, honey."

"Doan' le's talk about it, Huck. Â Po' niggers can't have no luck. Â I
awluz 'spected dat rattlesnake-skin warn't done wid its work."

"It ain't yo' fault, Huck; you didn' know. Â Don't you blame yo'self
'bout it."

"Well, 'twarn't no use to 'sturb you, Huck, tell we could do sumfnÂ—but
we's all right now. Â I ben a-buyin' pots en pans en vittles, as I got a
chanst, en a-patchin' up de raf' nights whenÂ—"

"Huck, does you reck'n we gwyne to run acrost any mo' kings on dis
trip?"

"Don't it s'prise you de way dem kings carries on, Huck?"

"Why don't it, Huck?"

"But, Huck, dese kings o' ourn is reglar rapscallions; dat's jist what
dey is; dey's reglar rapscallions."

"But dis one do _smell_ so like de nation, Huck."

"Well, anyways, I doan' hanker for no mo' un um, Huck. Â Dese is all I
kin stan'."

"En wid dat I fetch' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin'.
Den I went into de yuther room, en 'uz gone 'bout ten minutes; en when
I come back dah was dat do' a-stannin' open _yit_, en dat chile stannin'
mos' right in it, a-lookin' down and mournin', en de tears runnin' down.
Â My, but I _wuz_ mad! Â I was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis' denÂ—it was a
do' dat open innerdsÂ—jis' den, 'long come de wind en slam it to, behine
de chile, ker-BLAM!Â—en my lan', de chile never move'! Â My breff mos'
hop outer me; en I feel soÂ—soÂ—I doan' know HOW I feel. Â I crope out,
all a-tremblin', en crope aroun' en open de do' easy en slow, en poke my
head in behine de chile, sof' en still, en all uv a sudden I says POW!
jis' as loud as I could yell. Â _She never budge!_ Â Oh, Huck, I bust out
a-cryin' en grab her up in my arms, en say, "Oh, de po' little thing!
Â De Lord God Amighty fogive po' ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne to fogive
hisself as long's he live!" Â Oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, Huck, plumb
deef en dumbÂ—en I'd ben a-treat'n her so!"

"Seein' how I'm dressed, I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St.
Louis or Cincinnati, or some other big place. Â Go for the steamboat,
Huckleberry; we'll come down to the village on her."

Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to
be a slave at home where his family was, as long as he'd _got_ to be a
slave, and so I'd better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to
tell Miss Watson where he was. Â But I soon give up that notion for two
things: she'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness
for leaving her, and so she'd sell him straight down the river again;
and if she didn't, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger,
and they'd make Jim feel it all the time, and so he'd feel ornery and
disgraced. And then think of _me_! Â It would get all around that Huck
Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom; and if I was ever to see
anybody from that town again I'd be ready to get down and lick his boots
for shame. Â That's just the way: Â a person does a low-down thing, and
then he don't want to take no consequences of it. Thinks as long as he
can hide it, it ain't no disgrace. Â That was my fix exactly. The more I
studied about this the more my conscience went to grinding me, and the
more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling. And at last, when
it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence
slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being
watched all the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was stealing a
poor old woman's nigger that hadn't ever done me no harm, and now was
showing me there's One that's always on the lookout, and ain't a-going
to allow no such miserable doings to go only just so fur and no further,
I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared. Â Well, I tried the best I
could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung
up wicked, and so I warn't so much to blame; but something inside of me
kept saying, "There was the Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; and
if you'd a done it they'd a learnt you there that people that acts as
I'd been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire."

_Huck Finn._

"Looky here, Huck, what fools we are to not think of it before! Â I bet I
know where Jim is."

"_Work_? Â Why, cert'nly it would work, like rats a-fighting. Â But it's
too blame' simple; there ain't nothing _to_ it. Â What's the good of a
plan that ain't no more trouble than that? Â It's as mild as goose-milk.
Â Why, Huck, it wouldn't make no more talk than breaking into a soap
factory."

"It's as simple as tit-tat-toe, three-in-a-row, and as easy as
playing hooky. Â I should _hope_ we can find a way that's a little more
complicated than _that_, Huck Finn."

"Why, _Huck_! Â En good _lan_'! ain' dat Misto Tom?"

"Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be.
And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan.
Â There ain't no watchman to be druggedÂ—now there _ought_ to be a
watchman. Â There ain't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to. Â And
there's Jim chained by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of his
bed: Â why, all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off
the chain. Â And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the
punkin-headed nigger, and don't send nobody to watch the nigger. Â Jim
could a got out of that window-hole before this, only there wouldn't be
no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg. Â Why, drat it,
Huck, it's the stupidest arrangement I ever see. You got to invent _all_
the difficulties. Â Well, we can't help it; we got to do the best we can
with the materials we've got. Anyhow, there's one thingÂ—there's more
honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers,
where there warn't one of them furnished to you by the people who it was
their duty to furnish them, and you had to contrive them all out of your
own head. Â Now look at just that one thing of the lantern. Â When you
come down to the cold facts, we simply got to _let on_ that a lantern's
resky. Â Why, we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to,
I believe. Â Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up something to
make a saw out of the first chance we get."

"Well, if that ain't just like you, Huck Finn. Â You _can_ get up the
infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing. Â Why, hain't you ever read
any books at all?Â—Baron Trenck, nor Casanova, nor Benvenuto Chelleeny,
nor Henri IV., nor none of them heroes? Â Who ever heard of getting a
prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that? Â No; the way all the
best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just
so, and swallow the sawdust, so it can't be found, and put some dirt and
grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal can't see
no sign of it's being sawed, and thinks the bed-leg is perfectly sound.
Then, the night you're ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she goes; slip
off your chain, and there you are. Â Nothing to do but hitch your
rope ladder to the battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the
moatÂ—because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short, you knowÂ—and
there's your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and
fling you across a saddle, and away you go to your native Langudoc, or
Navarre, or wherever it is. It's gaudy, Huck. Â I wish there was a moat
to this cabin. If we get time, the night of the escape, we'll dig one."

"_Do_ with it? Â He can hide it in his bed, can't he?" Â That's what they
all do; and _he's_ got to, too. Â Huck, you don't ever seem to want to do
anything that's regular; you want to be starting something fresh all the
time. S'pose he _don't_ do nothing with it? ain't it there in his bed,
for a clew, after he's gone? and don't you reckon they'll want clews?
Â Of course they will. Â And you wouldn't leave them any? Â That would be a
_pretty_ howdy-do, _wouldn't_ it! Â I never heard of such a thing."

"Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, if I was as ignorant as you I'd keep
stillÂ—that's what I"D do. Â Who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping
by a hickry-bark ladder? Â Why, it's perfectly ridiculous."

"That ain't got anything to _do_ with it, Huck Finn. Â All _he's_ got to
do is to write on the plate and throw it out. Â You don't _have_ to be
able to read it. Why, half the time you can't read anything a prisoner
writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else."

"Huck Finn, did you _ever_ hear of a prisoner having picks and shovels,
and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with?
Â Now I want to ask youÂ—if you got any reasonableness in you at allÂ—what
kind of a show would _that_ give him to be a hero? Â Why, they might as
well lend him the key and done with it. Â Picks and shovelsÂ—why, they
wouldn't furnish 'em to a king."

"It ain't no use to try to learn you nothing, Huck. Â Run along and
smouch the knivesÂ—three of them." Â So I done it.

"It ain't no use, Huck, it ain't a-going to work. Â If we was prisoners
it would, because then we'd have as many years as we wanted, and no
hurry; and we wouldn't get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while
they was changing watches, and so our hands wouldn't get blistered, and
we could keep it up right along, year in and year out, and do it right,
and the way it ought to be done. Â But _we_ can't fool along; we got to
rush; we ain't got no time to spare. Â If we was to put in another
night this way we'd have to knock off for a week to let our hands get
wellÂ—couldn't touch a case-knife with them sooner."

"Look at Lady Jane Grey," he says; "look at Gilford Dudley; look at old
Northumberland! Â Why, Huck, s'pose it _is_ considerble trouble?Â—what
you going to do?Â—how you going to get around it? Â Jim's _got_ to do his
inscription and coat of arms. Â They all do."

"But de trouble all _done_ ef de snake bite me while I's a tryin' him.
Mars Tom, I's willin' to tackle mos' anything 'at ain't onreasonable,
but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, I's
gwyne to _leave_, dat's _shore_."

"No!Â—is that so? Â _ain't_ it bully! Â Why, Huck, if it was to do over
again, I bet I could fetch two hundred! Â If we could put it off tillÂ—"

"En a mighty good job it wuz, too, Huck. Â It 'uz planned beautiful, en
it 'uz done beautiful; en dey ain't _nobody_ kin git up a plan dat's mo'
mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz."

"Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck. Â Ef it wuz _him_ dat 'uz
bein' sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, "Go on
en save me, nemmine 'bout a doctor f'r to save dis one?" Â Is dat like
Mars Tom Sawyer? Â Would he say dat? Â You _bet_ he wouldn't! Â _well_,
den, is _Jim_ gywne to say it? Â No, sahÂ—I doan' budge a step out'n dis
place 'dout a _doctor_, not if it's forty year!"

"You mean where's Huck _Finn_Â—that's what you mean! Â I reckon I hain't
raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years not to know him when I
_see_ him. Â That _would_ be a pretty howdy-do. Come out from under that
bed, Huck Finn."

"Dah, now, Huck, what I tell you?Â—what I tell you up dah on Jackson
islan'? Â I _tole_ you I got a hairy breas', en what's de sign un it; en
I _tole_ you I ben rich wunst, en gwineter to be rich _agin_; en it's
come true; en heah she is! Â _dah_, now! doan' talk to _me_Â—signs is
_signs_, mine I tell you; en I knowed jis' 's well 'at I 'uz gwineter be
rich agin as I's a-stannin' heah dis minute!"

"He ain't a-comin' back no mo', Huck."

"Nemmine why, HuckÂ—but he ain't comin' back no mo."

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,
Complete, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

