CHAPTER II. The Boys Escape Jim.Â—Torn Sawyer's Gang.Â—Deep-laid Plans.

CHAPTER VIII. Sleeping in the Woods.Â—Raising the Dead.Â—Exploring the
Island.Â—Finding Jim.Â—Jim's Escape.Â—Signs.Â—Balum.

CHAPTER XXIII. Sold.Â—Royal Comparisons.Â—Jim Gets Home-sick.

CHAPTER XXIV. Jim in Royal Robes.Â—They Take a Passenger.Â—Getting
Information.Â—Family Grief.

CHAPTER XXXI. Ominous Plans.Â—News from Jim.Â—Old Recollections.Â—A Sheep
Story.Â—Valuable Information.

CHAPTER XL. Fishing.Â—The Vigilance Committee.Â—A Lively Run.Â—Jim Advises
a Doctor.

Jim

Jim Listening

Jim

Jim Listening

Jim and the Ghost

Jim sees a Dead Man

Jim and the Snake

"Jim Lit Out"

Jim's Coat of Arms

Jim advises a Doctor

The Doctor speaks for Jim

WE went tiptoeing along a path amongst the trees back towards the end of
the widow's garden, stooping down so as the branches wouldn't scrape our
heads. When we was passing by the kitchen I fell over a root and made
a noise. Â We scrouched down and laid still. Â Miss Watson's big nigger,
named Jim, was setting in the kitchen door; we could see him pretty
clear, because there was a light behind him. Â He got up and stretched
his neck out about a minute, listening. Â Then he says:

He listened some more; then he come tiptoeing down and stood right
between us; we could a touched him, nearly. Â Well, likely it was
minutes and minutes that there warn't a sound, and we all there so close
together. Â There was a place on my ankle that got to itching, but I
dasn't scratch it; and then my ear begun to itch; and next my back,
right between my shoulders. Â Seemed like I'd die if I couldn't scratch.
Â Well, I've noticed that thing plenty times since. Â If you are with
the quality, or at a funeral, or trying to go to sleep when you ain't
sleepyÂ—if you are anywheres where it won't do for you to scratch, why
you will itch all over in upwards of a thousand places. Pretty soon Jim
says:

So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom. Â He leaned his back up
against a tree, and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched
one of mine. Â My nose begun to itch. Â It itched till the tears come into
my eyes. Â But I dasn't scratch. Â Then it begun to itch on the inside.
Next I got to itching underneath. Â I didn't know how I was going to set
still. This miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes; but
it seemed a sight longer than that. Â I was itching in eleven different
places now. Â I reckoned I couldn't stand it more'n a minute longer,
but I set my teeth hard and got ready to try. Â Just then Jim begun
to breathe heavy; next he begun to snoreÂ—and then I was pretty soon
comfortable again.

Tom he made a sign to meÂ—kind of a little noise with his mouthÂ—and we
went creeping away on our hands and knees. Â When we was ten foot off Tom
whispered to me, and wanted to tie Jim to the tree for fun. Â But I said
no; he might wake and make a disturbance, and then they'd find out I
warn't in. Then Tom said he hadn't got candles enough, and he would slip
in the kitchen and get some more. Â I didn't want him to try. Â I said Jim
might wake up and come. Â But Tom wanted to resk it; so we slid in there
and got three candles, and Tom laid five cents on the table for pay.
Then we got out, and I was in a sweat to get away; but nothing would do
Tom but he must crawl to where Jim was, on his hands and knees, and play
something on him. Â I waited, and it seemed a good while, everything was
so still and lonesome.

As soon as Tom was back we cut along the path, around the garden fence,
and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of
the house. Â Tom said he slipped Jim's hat off of his head and hung it
on a limb right over him, and Jim stirred a little, but he didn't wake.
Afterwards Jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance,
and rode him all over the State, and then set him under the trees again,
and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it. Â And next time Jim told
it he said they rode him down to New Orleans; and, after that, every
time he told it he spread it more and more, till by and by he said they
rode him all over the world, and tired him most to death, and his back
was all over saddle-boils. Â Jim was monstrous proud about it, and he
got so he wouldn't hardly notice the other niggers. Â Niggers would come
miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more looked up to than any
nigger in that country. Â Strange niggers would stand with their mouths
open and look him all over, same as if he was a wonder. Â Niggers is
always talking about witches in the dark by the kitchen fire; but
whenever one was talking and letting on to know all about such things,
Jim would happen in and say, "Hm! Â What you know 'bout witches?" and
that nigger was corked up and had to take a back seat. Â Jim always kept
that five-center piece round his neck with a string, and said it was a
charm the devil give to him with his own hands, and told him he could
cure anybody with it and fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by
saying something to it; but he never told what it was he said to it.
Â Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim anything they
had, just for a sight of that five-center piece; but they wouldn't touch
it, because the devil had had his hands on it. Â Jim was most ruined for
a servant, because he got stuck up on account of having seen the devil
and been rode by witches.

Miss Watson's nigger, Jim, had a hair-ball as big as your fist, which
had been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox, and he used to do
magic with it. Â He said there was a spirit inside of it, and it knowed
everything. Â So I went to him that night and told him pap was here
again, for I found his tracks in the snow. Â What I wanted to know was,
what he was going to do, and was he going to stay? Â Jim got out his
hair-ball and said something over it, and then he held it up and dropped
it on the floor. Â It fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an inch.
Â Jim tried it again, and then another time, and it acted just the same.
Â Jim got down on his knees, and put his ear against it and listened.
Â But it warn't no use; he said it wouldn't talk. He said sometimes it
wouldn't talk without money. Â I told him I had an old slick counterfeit
quarter that warn't no good because the brass showed through the silver
a little, and it wouldn't pass nohow, even if the brass didn't show,
because it was so slick it felt greasy, and so that would tell on it
every time. Â (I reckoned I wouldn't say nothing about the dollar I got
from the judge.) I said it was pretty bad money, but maybe the hair-ball
would take it, because maybe it wouldn't know the difference. Â Jim smelt
it and bit it and rubbed it, and said he would manage so the hair-ball
would think it was good. Â He said he would split open a raw Irish potato
and stick the quarter in between and keep it there all night, and next
morning you couldn't see no brass, and it wouldn't feel greasy no more,
and so anybody in town would take it in a minute, let alone a hair-ball.
Â Well, I knowed a potato would do that before, but I had forgot it.

Jim put the quarter under the hair-ball, and got down and listened
again. This time he said the hair-ball was all right. Â He said it
would tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to. Â I says, go on. Â So the
hair-ball talked to Jim, and Jim told it to me. Â He says:

So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two, and
then let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows. Â The moon was
shining, and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day.
Â I poked along well on to an hour, everything still as rocks and sound
asleep. Well, by this time I was most down to the foot of the island. Â A
little ripply, cool breeze begun to blow, and that was as good as saying
the night was about done. Â I give her a turn with the paddle and brung
her nose to shore; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the edge
of the woods. Â I sat down there on a log, and looked out through the
leaves. Â I see the moon go off watch, and the darkness begin to blanket
the river. But in a little while I see a pale streak over the treetops,
and knowed the day was coming. Â So I took my gun and slipped off towards
where I had run across that camp fire, stopping every minute or two
to listen. Â But I hadn't no luck somehow; I couldn't seem to find the
place. Â But by and by, sure enough, I catched a glimpse of fire away
through the trees. Â I went for it, cautious and slow. Â By and by I was
close enough to have a look, and there laid a man on the ground. Â It
most give me the fan-tods. He had a blanket around his head, and his
head was nearly in the fire. Â I set there behind a clump of bushes, in
about six foot of him, and kept my eyes on him steady. Â It was getting
gray daylight now. Â Pretty soon he gapped and stretched himself and hove
off the blanket, and it was Miss Watson's Jim! Â I bet I was glad to see
him. Â I says:

"Hello, Jim!" and skipped out.

"Doan' hurt meÂ—don't! Â I hain't ever done no harm to a ghos'. Â I alwuz
liked dead people, en done all I could for 'em. Â You go en git in de
river agin, whah you b'longs, en doan' do nuffn to Ole Jim, 'at 'uz
awluz yo' fren'."

Well, I warn't long making him understand I warn't dead. Â I was ever so
glad to see Jim. Â I warn't lonesome now. Â I told him I warn't afraid of
_him_ telling the people where I was. Â I talked along, but he only set
there and looked at me; never said nothing. Â Then I says:

"Why, how long you been on the island, Jim?"

So we went over to where the canoe was, and while he built a fire in
a grassy open place amongst the trees, I fetched meal and bacon and
coffee, and coffee-pot and frying-pan, and sugar and tin cups, and the
nigger was set back considerable, because he reckoned it was all done
with witchcraft. I catched a good big catfish, too, and Jim cleaned him
with his knife, and fried him.

When breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot.
Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most about starved. Â Then
when we had got pretty well stuffed, we laid off and lazied. Â By and by
Jim says:

"How do you come to be here, Jim, and how'd you get here?"

"Why, Jim?"

"Blamed if I would, Jim."

"Jim!"

Some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a time and
lighting. Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain. Â He said it was
a sign when young chickens flew that way, and so he reckoned it was the
same way when young birds done it. Â I was going to catch some of them,
but Jim wouldn't let me. Â He said it was death. Â He said his father laid
mighty sick once, and some of them catched a bird, and his old granny
said his father would die, and he did.

And Jim said you mustn't count the things you are going to cook for
dinner, because that would bring bad luck. Â The same if you shook the
table-cloth after sundown. Â And he said if a man owned a beehive
and that man died, the bees must be told about it before sun-up next
morning, or else the bees would all weaken down and quit work and die.
Â Jim said bees wouldn't sting idiots; but I didn't believe that, because
I had tried them lots of times myself, and they wouldn't sting me.

I had heard about some of these things before, but not all of them. Â Jim
knowed all kinds of signs. Â He said he knowed most everything. Â I said
it looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck, and so I asked
him if there warn't any good-luck signs. Â He says:

"Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, Jim?"

"What did you speculate in, Jim?"

"What did you do with the ten cents, Jim?"

"Well, what did come of it, Jim?"

"Well, it's all right anyway, Jim, long as you're going to be rich again
some time or other."

This place was a tolerable long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot
high. We had a rough time getting to the top, the sides was so steep and
the bushes so thick. Â We tramped and clumb around all over it, and by
and by found a good big cavern in the rock, most up to the top on the
side towards Illinois. Â The cavern was as big as two or three rooms
bunched together, and Jim could stand up straight in it. Â It was cool in
there. Jim was for putting our traps in there right away, but I said we
didn't want to be climbing up and down there all the time.

Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place, and had all the traps
in the cavern, we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island,
and they would never find us without dogs. Â And, besides, he said them
little birds had said it was going to rain, and did I want the things to
get wet?

"Jim, this is nice," I says. Â "I wouldn't want to be nowhere else but
here. Pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread."

"Well, you wouldn't a ben here 'f it hadn't a ben for Jim. Â You'd a ben
down dah in de woods widout any dinner, en gittn' mos' drownded, too;
dat you would, honey. Â Chickens knows when it's gwyne to rain, en so do
de birds, chile."

The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island. Â Then
we looked in at the window. Â We could make out a bed, and a table, and
two old chairs, and lots of things around about on the floor, and there
was clothes hanging against the wall. Â There was something laying on the
floor in the far corner that looked like a man. Â So Jim says:

But it didn't budge. Â So I hollered again, and then Jim says:

I didn't look at him at all. Â Jim throwed some old rags over him, but
he needn't done it; I didn't want to see him. Â There was heaps of old
greasy cards scattered around over the floor, and old whisky bottles,
and a couple of masks made out of black cloth; and all over the walls
was the ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal.
Â There was two old dirty calico dresses, and a sun-bonnet, and some
women's underclothes hanging against the wall, and some men's clothing,
too. Â We put the lot into the canoeÂ—it might come good. Â There was a
boy's old speckled straw hat on the floor; I took that, too. Â And there
was a bottle that had had milk in it, and it had a rag stopper for a
baby to suck. Â We would a took the bottle, but it was broke. Â There was
a seedy old chest, and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke. Â They
stood open, but there warn't nothing left in them that was any account.
Â The way things was scattered about we reckoned the people left in a
hurry, and warn't fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff.

We got an old tin lantern, and a butcher-knife without any handle, and
a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any store, and a lot of tallow
candles, and a tin candlestick, and a gourd, and a tin cup, and a ratty
old bedquilt off the bed, and a reticule with needles and pins and
beeswax and buttons and thread and all such truck in it, and a hatchet
and some nails, and a fishline as thick as my little finger with some
monstrous hooks on it, and a roll of buckskin, and a leather dog-collar,
and a horseshoe, and some vials of medicine that didn't have no label
on them; and just as we was leaving I found a tolerable good curry-comb,
and Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow, and a wooden leg. Â The straps
was broke off of it, but, barring that, it was a good enough leg, though
it was too long for me and not long enough for Jim, and we couldn't find
the other one, though we hunted all around.

And so, take it all around, we made a good haul. Â When we was ready to
shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island, and it was pretty
broad day; so I made Jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with the
quilt, because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good
ways off. Â I paddled over to the Illinois shore, and drifted down most
a half a mile doing it. Â I crept up the dead water under the bank, and
hadn't no accidents and didn't see nobody. Â We got home all safe.

AFTER breakfast I wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he
come to be killed, but Jim didn't want to. Â He said it would fetch bad
luck; and besides, he said, he might come and ha'nt us; he said a man
that warn't buried was more likely to go a-ha'nting around than one
that was planted and comfortable. Â That sounded pretty reasonable, so
I didn't say no more; but I couldn't keep from studying over it and
wishing I knowed who shot the man, and what they done it for.

We rummaged the clothes we'd got, and found eight dollars in silver
sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat. Â Jim said he reckoned
the people in that house stole the coat, because if they'd a knowed the
money was there they wouldn't a left it. Â I said I reckoned they killed
him, too; but Jim didn't want to talk about that. Â I says:

"Now you think it's bad luck; but what did you say when I fetched in the
snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday?
You said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin
with my hands. Â Well, here's your bad luck! Â We've raked in all this
truck and eight dollars besides. Â I wish we could have some bad luck
like this every day, Jim."

It did come, too. Â It was a Tuesday that we had that talk. Â Well, after
dinner Friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the
ridge, and got out of tobacco. Â I went to the cavern to get some, and
found a rattlesnake in there. Â I killed him, and curled him up on the
foot of Jim's blanket, ever so natural, thinking there'd be some fun
when Jim found him there. Â Well, by night I forgot all about the snake,
and when Jim flung himself down on the blanket while I struck a light
the snake's mate was there, and bit him.

He jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed was the
varmint curled up and ready for another spring. Â I laid him out in a
second with a stick, and Jim grabbed pap's whisky-jug and begun to pour
it down.

He was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the heel. Â That all
comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave
a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it. Â Jim told
me to chop off the snake's head and throw it away, and then skin the
body and roast a piece of it. Â I done it, and he eat it and said it
would help cure him. He made me take off the rattles and tie them around
his wrist, too. Â He said that that would help. Â Then I slid out quiet
and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the bushes; for I warn't going
to let Jim find out it was all my fault, not if I could help it.

Jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then he got out of his
head and pitched around and yelled; but every time he come to himself he
went to sucking at the jug again. Â His foot swelled up pretty big, and
so did his leg; but by and by the drunk begun to come, and so I judged
he was all right; but I'd druther been bit with a snake than pap's
whisky.

Jim was laid up for four days and nights. Â Then the swelling was all
gone and he was around again. Â I made up my mind I wouldn't ever take
a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hands, now that I see what had come
of it. Jim said he reckoned I would believe him next time. Â And he said
that handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn't
got to the end of it yet. Â He said he druther see the new moon over his
left shoulder as much as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin
in his hand. Â Well, I was getting to feel that way myself, though I've
always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is
one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do. Â Old Hank
Bunker done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than two years he
got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower, and spread himself out so
that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid him
edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin, and buried him so, so
they say, but I didn't see it. Â Pap told me. Â But anyway it all come of
looking at the moon that way, like a fool.

Well, the days went along, and the river went down between its banks
again; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big
hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was
as big as a man, being six foot two inches long, and weighed over two
hundred pounds. We couldn't handle him, of course; he would a flung us
into Illinois. Â We just set there and watched him rip and tear around
till he drownded. Â We found a brass button in his stomach and a round
ball, and lots of rubbage. Â We split the ball open with the hatchet,
and there was a spool in it. Â Jim said he'd had it there a long time, to
coat it over so and make a ball of it. Â It was as big a fish as was ever
catched in the Mississippi, I reckon. Â Jim said he hadn't ever seen
a bigger one. Â He would a been worth a good deal over at the village.
Â They peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the market-house
there; everybody buys some of him; his meat's as white as snow and makes
a good fry.

Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull, and I wanted to get a
stirring up some way. Â I said I reckoned I would slip over the river and
find out what was going on. Â Jim liked that notion; but he said I
must go in the dark and look sharp. Â Then he studied it over and said,
couldn't I put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl?
Â That was a good notion, too. Â So we shortened up one of the calico
gowns, and I turned up my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it. Â Jim
hitched it behind with the hooks, and it was a fair fit. Â I put on the
sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin, and then for a body to look in
and see my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe. Â Jim said
nobody would know me, even in the daytime, hardly. Â I practiced around
all day to get the hang of the things, and by and by I could do pretty
well in them, only Jim said I didn't walk like a girl; and he said
I must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket. Â I took
notice, and done better.

"Most everybody thought it at first. Â He'll never know how nigh he come
to getting lynched. Â But before night they changed around and judged it
was done by a runaway nigger named Jim."

Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place, a mile and a half
below, as hard as I could go. Â I landed, and slopped through the timber
and up the ridge and into the cavern. Â There Jim laid, sound asleep on
the ground. Â I roused him out and says:

"Git up and hump yourself, Jim! Â There ain't a minute to lose. Â They're
after us!"

Jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but the way he
worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared. Â By
that time everything we had in the world was on our raft, and she was
ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid. Â We
put out the camp fire at the cavern the first thing, and didn't show a
candle outside after that.

If the men went to the island I just expect they found the camp fire I
built, and watched it all night for Jim to come. Â Anyways, they stayed
away from us, and if my building the fire never fooled them it warn't no
fault of mine. Â I played it as low down on them as I could.

We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the Illinois
side, and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that place, so we
warn't afraid of anybody running across us. Â We laid there all day,
and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the Missouri shore, and
up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle. Â I told Jim all
about the time I had jabbering with that woman; and Jim said she was
a smart one, and if she was to start after us herself she wouldn't set
down and watch a camp fireÂ—no, sir, she'd fetch a dog. Â Well, then, I
said, why couldn't she tell her husband to fetch a dog? Â Jim said he
bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start, and he
believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that
time, or else we wouldn't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile
below the villageÂ—no, indeedy, we would be in that same old town again.
Â So I said I didn't care what was the reason they didn't get us as long
as they didn't.

When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the
cottonwood thicket, and looked up and down and across; nothing in sight;
so Jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug
wigwam to get under in blazing weather and rainy, and to keep the things
dry. Jim made a floor for the wigwam, and raised it a foot or more above
the level of the raft, so now the blankets and all the traps was out of
reach of steamboat waves. Â Right in the middle of the wigwam we made a
layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for
to hold it to its place; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather
or chilly; the wigwam would keep it from being seen. Â We made an extra
steering-oar, too, because one of the others might get broke on a snag
or something. We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern
on, because we must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat
coming down-stream, to keep from getting run over; but we wouldn't have
to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call
a "crossing"; for the river was pretty high yet, very low banks being
still a little under water; so up-bound boats didn't always run the
channel, but hunted easy water.

Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields and borrowed a
watermelon, or a mushmelon, or a punkin, or some new corn, or things of
that kind. Â Pap always said it warn't no harm to borrow things if you
was meaning to pay them back some time; but the widow said it warn't
anything but a soft name for stealing, and no decent body would do it.
Â Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly
right; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things
from the list and say we wouldn't borrow them any moreÂ—then he reckoned
it wouldn't be no harm to borrow the others. Â So we talked it over all
one night, drifting along down the river, trying to make up our minds
whether to drop the watermelons, or the cantelopes, or the mushmelons,
or what. Â But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, and
concluded to drop crabapples and p'simmons. Â We warn't feeling just
right before that, but it was all comfortable now. Â I was glad the way
it come out, too, because crabapples ain't ever good, and the p'simmons
wouldn't be ripe for two or three months yet.

The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight, with
a power of thunder and lightning, and the rain poured down in a solid
sheet. We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself.
When the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead,
and high, rocky bluffs on both sides. Â By and by says I, "Hel-_lo_, Jim,
looky yonder!" It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock.
Â We was drifting straight down for her. Â The lightning showed her very
distinct. Â She was leaning over, with part of her upper deck above
water, and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear, and a
chair by the big bell, with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it,
when the flashes come.

"Le's land on her, Jim."

But Jim was dead against it at first. Â He says:

"Watchman your grandmother," I says; "there ain't nothing to watch but
the texas and the pilot-house; and do you reckon anybody's going to resk
his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this, when
it's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute?" Â Jim
couldn't say nothing to that, so he didn't try. Â "And besides," I says,
"we might borrow something worth having out of the captain's stateroom.
Â Seegars, I bet youÂ—and cost five cents apiece, solid cash. Â Steamboat
captains is always rich, and get sixty dollars a month, and _they_ don't
care a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it. Â Stick a
candle in your pocket; I can't rest, Jim, till we give her a rummaging.
Â Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing? Â Not for pie, he
wouldn't. He'd call it an adventureÂ—that's what he'd call it; and he'd
land on that wreck if it was his last act. Â And wouldn't he throw style
into it?Â—wouldn't he spread himself, nor nothing? Â Why, you'd think it
was Christopher C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come. Â I wish Tom Sawyer
_was_ here."

Jim he grumbled a little, but give in. Â He said we mustn't talk any more
than we could help, and then talk mighty low. Â The lightning showed us
the wreck again just in time, and we fetched the stabboard derrick, and
made fast there.

The deck was high out here. Â We went sneaking down the slope of it to
labboard, in the dark, towards the texas, feeling our way slow with our
feet, and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys, for it was so
dark we couldn't see no sign of them. Â Pretty soon we struck the forward
end of the skylight, and clumb on to it; and the next step fetched us in
front of the captain's door, which was open, and by Jimminy, away down
through the texas-hall we see a light! and all in the same second we
seem to hear low voices in yonder!

Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and told me to come
along. Â I says, all right, and was going to start for the raft; but just
then I heard a voice wail out and say:

"It's a lie, Jim Turner. Â You've acted this way before. Â You always want
more'n your share of the truck, and you've always got it, too, because
you've swore 't if you didn't you'd tell. Â But this time you've said
it jest one time too many. Â You're the meanest, treacherousest hound in
this country."

By this time Jim was gone for the raft. Â I was just a-biling with
curiosity; and I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn't back out now,
and so I won't either; I'm a-going to see what's going on here. Â So I
dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage, and crept aft
in the dark till there warn't but one stateroom betwixt me and the
cross-hall of the texas. Â Then in there I see a man stretched on the
floor and tied hand and foot, and two men standing over him, and one
of them had a dim lantern in his hand, and the other one had a pistol.
Â This one kept pointing the pistol at the man's head on the floor, and
saying:

"'Deed you _ain't!_ Â You never said no truer thing 'n that, you bet
you." And once he said: Â "Hear him beg! and yit if we hadn't got the
best of him and tied him he'd a killed us both. Â And what _for_? Â Jist
for noth'n. Jist because we stood on our _rights_Â—that's what for. Â But
I lay you ain't a-goin' to threaten nobody any more, Jim Turner. Â Put
_up_ that pistol, Bill."

So they started, and I lit out, all in a cold sweat, and scrambled
forward. It was dark as pitch there; but I said, in a kind of a coarse
whisper, "Jim!" and he answered up, right at my elbow, with a sort of a
moan, and I says:

"Quick, Jim, it ain't no time for fooling around and moaning; there's a
gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don't hunt up their boat and set
her drifting down the river so these fellows can't get away from the
wreck there's one of 'em going to be in a bad fix. Â But if we find their
boat we can put _all_ of 'em in a bad fixÂ—for the sheriff 'll get 'em.
QuickÂ—hurry! Â I'll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard. You
start at the raft, andÂ—"

WELL, I catched my breath and most fainted. Â Shut up on a wreck with
such a gang as that! Â But it warn't no time to be sentimentering. Â We'd
_got_ to find that boat nowÂ—had to have it for ourselves. Â So we went
a-quaking and shaking down the stabboard side, and slow work it was,
tooÂ—seemed a week before we got to the stern. Â No sign of a boat. Â Jim
said he didn't believe he could go any furtherÂ—so scared he hadn't
hardly any strength left, he said. Â But I said, come on, if we get left
on this wreck we are in a fix, sure. Â So on we prowled again. Â We struck
for the stern of the texas, and found it, and then scrabbled along
forwards on the skylight, hanging on from shutter to shutter, for the
edge of the skylight was in the water. Â When we got pretty close to the
cross-hall door there was the skiff, sure enough! Â I could just barely
see her. Â I felt ever so thankful. Â In another second I would a been
aboard of her, but just then the door opened. Â One of the men stuck his
head out only about a couple of foot from me, and I thought I was gone;
but he jerked it in again, and says:

The door slammed to because it was on the careened side; and in a half
second I was in the boat, and Jim come tumbling after me. Â I out with my
knife and cut the rope, and away we went!

When we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern
show like a little spark at the texas door for a second, and we knowed
by that that the rascals had missed their boat, and was beginning to
understand that they was in just as much trouble now as Jim Turner was.

Then Jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft. Â Now was the
first time that I begun to worry about the menÂ—I reckon I hadn't
had time to before. Â I begun to think how dreadful it was, even for
murderers, to be in such a fix. Â I says to myself, there ain't no
telling but I might come to be a murderer myself yet, and then how would
I like it? Â So says I to Jim:

It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again. Â We
seen a light now away down to the right, on shore. Â So I said I would
go for it. The skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole
there on the wreck. Â We hustled it on to the raft in a pile, and I told
Jim to float along down, and show a light when he judged he had gone
about two mile, and keep it burning till I come; then I manned my oars
and shoved for the light. Â As I got down towards it three or four more
showedÂ—up on a hillside. Â It was a village. Â I closed in above the shore
light, and laid on my oars and floated. Â As I went by I see it was a
lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat. Â I skimmed
around for the watchman, a-wondering whereabouts he slept; and by and
by I found him roosting on the bitts forward, with his head down between
his knees. Â I gave his shoulder two or three little shoves, and begun to
cry.

"Yes," he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like. Â "I'm the captain
and the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head
deck-hand; and sometimes I'm the freight and passengers. Â I ain't as
rich as old Jim Hornback, and I can't be so blame' generous and good
to Tom, Dick, and Harry as what he is, and slam around money the way he
does; but I've told him a many a time 't I wouldn't trade places with
him; for, says I, a sailor's life's the life for me, and I'm derned if
_I'd_ live two mile out o' town, where there ain't nothing ever goin'
on, not for all his spondulicks and as much more on top of it. Â Says IÂ—"

"Great guns! is _he_ her uncle? Â Looky here, you break for that light
over yonder-way, and turn out west when you git there, and about a
quarter of a mile out you'll come to the tavern; tell 'em to dart you
out to Jim Hornback's, and he'll foot the bill. Â And don't you fool
around any, because he'll want to know the news. Â Tell him I'll have
his niece all safe before he can get to town. Â Hump yourself, now; I'm
a-going up around the corner here to roust out my engineer."

It did seem a powerful long time before Jim's light showed up; and when
it did show it looked like it was a thousand mile off. Â By the time I
got there the sky was beginning to get a little gray in the east; so we
struck for an island, and hid the raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned
in and slept like dead people.

BY and by, when we got up, we turned over the truck the gang had stole
off of the wreck, and found boots, and blankets, and clothes, and all
sorts of other things, and a lot of books, and a spyglass, and three
boxes of seegars. Â We hadn't ever been this rich before in neither of
our lives. Â The seegars was prime. Â We laid off all the afternoon in the
woods talking, and me reading the books, and having a general good
time. I told Jim all about what happened inside the wreck and at the
ferryboat, and I said these kinds of things was adventures; but he said
he didn't want no more adventures. Â He said that when I went in the
texas and he crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone he
nearly died, because he judged it was all up with _him_ anyway it could
be fixed; for if he didn't get saved he would get drownded; and if he
did get saved, whoever saved him would send him back home so as to get
the reward, and then Miss Watson would sell him South, sure. Â Well, he
was right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon level head for a
nigger.

I read considerable to Jim about kings and dukes and earls and such, and
how gaudy they dressed, and how much style they put on, and called each
other your majesty, and your grace, and your lordship, and so on, 'stead
of mister; and Jim's eyes bugged out, and he was interested. Â He says:

"But hang it, Jim, you've clean missed the pointÂ—blame it, you've missed
it a thousand mile."

"_No_, Jim; you couldn't understand a word they saidÂ—not a single word."

"Looky here, Jim; does a cat talk like we do?"

I throwed the paddle down. Â I heard the whoop again; it was behind me
yet, but in a different place; it kept coming, and kept changing its
place, and I kept answering, till by and by it was in front of me again,
and I knowed the current had swung the canoe's head down-stream, and I
was all right if that was Jim and not some other raftsman hollering.
Â I couldn't tell nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing don't look
natural nor sound natural in a fog.

I just give up then. Â I knowed what the matter was. Â That cut bank
was an island, and Jim had gone down t'other side of it. Â It warn't no
towhead that you could float by in ten minutes. Â It had the big timber
of a regular island; it might be five or six miles long and more than
half a mile wide.

Well, I seemed to be in the open river again by and by, but I couldn't
hear no sign of a whoop nowheres. Â I reckoned Jim had fetched up on a
snag, maybe, and it was all up with him. Â I was good and tired, so I
laid down in the canoe and said I wouldn't bother no more. Â I didn't
want to go to sleep, of course; but I was so sleepy I couldn't help it;
so I thought I would take jest one little cat-nap.

When I got to it Jim was setting there with his head down between his
knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar. Â The
other oar was smashed off, and the raft was littered up with leaves and
branches and dirt. Â So she'd had a rough time.

I made fast and laid down under Jim's nose on the raft, and began to
gap, and stretch my fists out against Jim, and says:

"Hello, Jim, have I been asleep? Â Why didn't you stir me up?"

"What's the matter with you, Jim? Â You been a-drinking?"

"Well, I think you're here, plain enough, but I think you're a
tangle-headed old fool, Jim."

"Well, this is too many for me, Jim. Â I hain't seen no fog, nor no
islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing. Â I been setting here talking with
you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago, and I reckon
I done the same. Â You couldn't a got drunk in that time, so of course
you've been dreaming."

Jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes, but set there studying
over it. Â Then he says:

"Oh, well, that's all right, because a dream does tire a body like
everything sometimes. Â But this one was a staving dream; tell me all
about it, Jim."

So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through, just as
it happened, only he painted it up considerable. Â Then he said he must
start in and "'terpret" it, because it was sent for a warning. Â He said
the first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good, but
the current was another man that would get us away from him. Â The whoops
was warnings that would come to us every now and then, and if we didn't
try hard to make out to understand them they'd just take us into bad
luck, 'stead of keeping us out of it. Â The lot of towheads was troubles
we was going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean
folks, but if we minded our business and didn't talk back and aggravate
them, we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big
clear river, which was the free States, and wouldn't have no more
trouble.

"Oh, well, that's all interpreted well enough as far as it goes, Jim," I
says; "but what does _these_ things stand for?"

Jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back at the trash
again. Â He had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he
couldn't seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place
again right away. Â But when he did get the thing straightened around he
looked at me steady without ever smiling, and says:

"What do dey stan' for? Â I'se gwyne to tell you. Â When I got all wore
out wid work, en wid de callin' for you, en went to sleep, my heart wuz
mos' broke bekase you wuz los', en I didn' k'yer no' mo' what become
er me en de raf'. Â En when I wake up en fine you back agin, all safe
en soun', de tears come, en I could a got down on my knees en kiss yo'
foot, I's so thankful. En all you wuz thinkin' 'bout wuz how you could
make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie. Â Dat truck dah is _trash_; en trash
is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren's en makes 'em
ashamed."

We went drifting down into a big bend, and the night clouded up and got
hot. Â The river was very wide, and was walled with solid timber on
both sides; you couldn't see a break in it hardly ever, or a light. Â We
talked about Cairo, and wondered whether we would know it when we got to
it. Â I said likely we wouldn't, because I had heard say there warn't but
about a dozen houses there, and if they didn't happen to have them lit
up, how was we going to know we was passing a town? Â Jim said if the two
big rivers joined together there, that would show. Â But I said maybe
we might think we was passing the foot of an island and coming into the
same old river again. That disturbed JimÂ—and me too. Â So the question
was, what to do? Â I said, paddle ashore the first time a light showed,
and tell them pap was behind, coming along with a trading-scow, and
was a green hand at the business, and wanted to know how far it was to
Cairo. Â Jim thought it was a good idea, so we took a smoke on it and
waited.

But it warn't. Â It was Jack-o'-lanterns, or lightning bugs; so he set
down again, and went to watching, same as before. Â Jim said it made him
all over trembly and feverish to be so close to freedom. Â Well, I can
tell you it made me all over trembly and feverish, too, to hear him,
because I begun to get it through my head that he _was_ most freeÂ—and
who was to blame for it? Â Why, _me_. Â I couldn't get that out of my
conscience, no how nor no way. It got to troubling me so I couldn't
rest; I couldn't stay still in one place. Â It hadn't ever come home to
me before, what this thing was that I was doing. Â But now it did; and it
stayed with me, and scorched me more and more. Â I tried to make out to
myself that I warn't to blame, because I didn't run Jim off from his
rightful owner; but it warn't no use, conscience up and says, every
time, "But you knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a
paddled ashore and told somebody." Â That was soÂ—I couldn't get around
that noway. Â That was where it pinched. Â Conscience says to me, "What
had poor Miss Watson done to you that you could see her nigger go off
right under your eyes and never say one single word? Â What did that poor
old woman do to you that you could treat her so mean? Â Why, she tried to
learn you your book, she tried to learn you your manners, she tried to
be good to you every way she knowed how. Â _That's_ what she done."

I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I was dead. Â I
fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to myself, and Jim was
fidgeting up and down past me. Â We neither of us could keep still.
Â Every time he danced around and says, "Dah's Cairo!" it went through me
like a shot, and I thought if it _was_ Cairo I reckoned I would die of
miserableness.

Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to myself. Â He was
saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free State he
would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent, and when he
got enough he would buy his wife, which was owned on a farm close to
where Miss Watson lived; and then they would both work to buy the
two children, and if their master wouldn't sell them, they'd get an
Ab'litionist to go and steal them.

I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was such a lowering of him. Â My
conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, until at last I says
to it, "Let up on meÂ—it ain't too late yetÂ—I'll paddle ashore at the
first light and tell." Â I felt easy and happy and light as a feather
right off. Â All my troubles was gone. Â I went to looking out sharp for a
light, and sort of singing to myself. Â By and by one showed. Â Jim sings
out:

"I'll take the canoe and go and see, Jim. Â It mightn't be, you know."

"Pooty soon I'll be a-shout'n' for joy, en I'll say, it's all on
accounts o' Huck; I's a free man, en I couldn't ever ben free ef it
hadn' ben for Huck; Huck done it. Â Jim won't ever forgit you, Huck;
you's de bes' fren' Jim's ever had; en you's de _only_ fren' ole Jim's
got now."

I was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he says
this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me. Â I went along
slow then, and I warn't right down certain whether I was glad I started
or whether I warn't. Â When I was fifty yards off, Jim says:

"Dah you goes, de ole true Huck; de on'y white genlman dat ever kep' his
promise to ole Jim."

They went off and I got aboard the raft, feeling bad and low, because I
knowed very well I had done wrong, and I see it warn't no use for me
to try to learn to do right; a body that don't get _started_ right when
he's little ain't got no showÂ—when the pinch comes there ain't nothing
to back him up and keep him to his work, and so he gets beat. Â Then I
thought a minute, and says to myself, hold on; s'pose you'd a done right
and give Jim up, would you felt better than what you do now? Â No, says
I, I'd feel badÂ—I'd feel just the same way I do now. Â Well, then, says
I, what's the use you learning to do right when it's troublesome to do
right and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the same?
Â I was stuck. Â I couldn't answer that. Â So I reckoned I wouldn't bother
no more about it, but after this always do whichever come handiest at
the time.

I went into the wigwam; Jim warn't there. Â I looked all around; he
warn't anywhere. Â I says:

"Jim!"

"I was a-listenin' to all de talk, en I slips into de river en was gwyne
to shove for sho' if dey come aboard. Â Den I was gwyne to swim to de
raf' agin when dey was gone. Â But lawsy, how you did fool 'em, Huck!
Â Dat _wuz_ de smartes' dodge! Â I tell you, chile, I'spec it save' ole
JimÂ—ole Jim ain't going to forgit you for dat, honey."

Then we talked about the money. Â It was a pretty good raiseÂ—twenty
dollars apiece. Â Jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat
now, and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free
States. He said twenty mile more warn't far for the raft to go, but he
wished we was already there.

Towards daybreak we tied up, and Jim was mighty particular about hiding
the raft good. Â Then he worked all day fixing things in bundles, and
getting all ready to quit rafting.

I paddled to the raft. Â Jim was awful disappointed, but I said never
mind, Cairo would be the next place, I reckoned.

We passed another town before daylight, and I was going out again; but
it was high ground, so I didn't go. Â No high ground about Cairo, Jim
said. I had forgot it. Â We laid up for the day on a towhead tolerable
close to the left-hand bank. Â I begun to suspicion something. Â So did
Jim. Â I says:

"I wish I'd never seen that snake-skin, JimÂ—I do wish I'd never laid
eyes on it."

We could hear her pounding along, but we didn't see her good till she
was close. Â She aimed right for us. Â Often they do that and try to see
how close they can come without touching; sometimes the wheel bites off
a sweep, and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs, and thinks
he's mighty smart. Â Well, here she comes, and we said she was going to
try and shave us; but she didn't seem to be sheering off a bit. Â She
was a big one, and she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black
cloud with rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she bulged
out, big and scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining
like red-hot teeth, and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right
over us. Â There was a yell at us, and a jingling of bells to stop the
engines, a powwow of cussing, and whistling of steamÂ—and as Jim went
overboard on one side and I on the other, she come smashing straight
through the raft.

I sung out for Jim about a dozen times, but I didn't get any answer;
so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was "treading water," and
struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of me. Â But I made out to see
that the drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore, which
meant that I was in a crossing; so I changed off and went that way.

Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees hid
him. Â I poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch
as big as a bedroom all hung around with vines, and found a man laying
there asleepÂ—and, by jings, it was my old Jim!

"Why didn't you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner, Jim?"

"_What_ raft, Jim?"

"Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, JimÂ—did you catch her?"

It was just dark now. Â I never went near the house, but struck through
the woods and made for the swamp. Â Jim warn't on his island, so I
tramped off in a hurry for the crick, and crowded through the willows,
red-hot to jump aboard and get out of that awful country. Â The raft was
gone! Â My souls, but I was scared! Â I couldn't get my breath for most
a minute. Then I raised a yell. Â A voice not twenty-five foot from me
says:

It was Jim's voiceÂ—nothing ever sounded so good before. Â I run along the
bank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me, he was
so glad to see me. Â He says:

"All rightÂ—that's mighty good; they won't find me, and they'll think
I've been killed, and floated down the riverÂ—there's something up there
that 'll help them think soÂ—so don't you lose no time, Jim, but just
shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can."

I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in
the middle of the Mississippi. Â Then we hung up our signal lantern, and
judged that we was free and safe once more. Â I hadn't had a bite to eat
since yesterday, so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk,
and pork and cabbage and greensÂ—there ain't nothing in the world so good
when it's cooked rightÂ—and whilst I eat my supper we talked and had a
good time. Â I was powerful glad to get away from the feuds, and so was
Jim to get away from the swamp. Â We said there warn't no home like a
raft, after all. Â Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery, but a
raft don't. Â You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft.

A little smoke couldn't be noticed now, so we would take some fish off
of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast. Â And afterwards we would watch
the lonesomeness of the river, and kind of lazy along, and by and by
lazy off to sleep. Â Wake up by and by, and look to see what done it, and
maybe see a steamboat coughing along up-stream, so far off towards the
other side you couldn't tell nothing about her only whether she was
a stern-wheel or side-wheel; then for about an hour there wouldn't be
nothing to hear nor nothing to seeÂ—just solid lonesomeness. Â Next
you'd see a raft sliding by, away off yonder, and maybe a galoot on it
chopping, because they're most always doing it on a raft; you'd see the
axe flash and come downÂ—you don't hear nothing; you see that axe go
up again, and by the time it's above the man's head then you hear the
_k'chunk_!Â—it had took all that time to come over the water. Â So we
would put in the day, lazying around, listening to the stillness. Â Once
there was a thick fog, and the rafts and things that went by was beating
tin pans so the steamboats wouldn't run over them. Â A scow or a
raft went by so close we could hear them talking and cussing and
laughingÂ—heard them plain; but we couldn't see no sign of them; it made
you feel crawly; it was like spirits carrying on that way in the air.
Â Jim said he believed it was spirits; but I says:

Sometimes we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest
time. Yonder was the banks and the islands, across the water; and maybe
a sparkÂ—which was a candle in a cabin window; and sometimes on the water
you could see a spark or twoÂ—on a raft or a scow, you know; and maybe
you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts.
It's lovely to live on a raft. Â We had the sky up there, all speckled
with stars, and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them, and
discuss about whether they was made or only just happened. Â Jim he
allowed they was made, but I allowed they happened; I judged it would
have took too long to _make_ so many. Â Jim said the moon could a _laid_
them; well, that looked kind of reasonable, so I didn't say nothing
against it, because I've seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it
could be done. We used to watch the stars that fell, too, and see them
streak down. Â Jim allowed they'd got spoiled and was hove out of the
nest.

One morning about daybreak I found a canoe and crossed over a chute to
the main shoreÂ—it was only two hundred yardsÂ—and paddled about a mile
up a crick amongst the cypress woods, to see if I couldn't get some
berries. Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed
the crick, here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as
they could foot it. Â I thought I was a goner, for whenever anybody was
after anybody I judged it was _me_Â—or maybe Jim. Â I was about to dig out
from there in a hurry, but they was pretty close to me then, and sung
out and begged me to save their livesÂ—said they hadn't been doing
nothing, and was being chased for itÂ—said there was men and dogs
a-coming. Â They wanted to jump right in, but I says:

Jim's eyes bugged out when he heard that; and I reckon mine did, too.
Then the baldhead says: Â "No! you can't mean it?"

Jim pitied him ever so much, and so did I. We tried to comfort him, but
he said it warn't much use, he couldn't be much comforted; said if we
was a mind to acknowledge him, that would do him more good than most
anything else; so we said we would, if he would tell us how. Â He said we
ought to bow when we spoke to him, and say "Your Grace," or "My Lord,"
or "Your Lordship"Â—and he wouldn't mind it if we called him plain
"Bridgewater," which, he said, was a title anyway, and not a name; and
one of us ought to wait on him at dinner, and do any little thing for
him he wanted done.

Well, that was all easy, so we done it. Â All through dinner Jim stood
around and waited on him, and says, "Will yo' Grace have some o' dis or
some o' dat?" and so on, and a body could see it was mighty pleasing to
him.

You bet you, Jim and me stared this time. Â Then the duke says:

Well, he cried and took on so that me and Jim didn't know hardly what to
do, we was so sorryÂ—and so glad and proud we'd got him with us, too.
Â So we set in, like we done before with the duke, and tried to comfort
_him_. But he said it warn't no use, nothing but to be dead and done
with it all could do him any good; though he said it often made him feel
easier and better for a while if people treated him according to his
rights, and got down on one knee to speak to him, and always called him
"Your Majesty," and waited on him first at meals, and didn't set down
in his presence till he asked them. So Jim and me set to majestying him,
and doing this and that and t'other for him, and standing up till he
told us we might set down. Â This done him heaps of good, and so he
got cheerful and comfortable. Â But the duke kind of soured on him, and
didn't look a bit satisfied with the way things was going; still,
the king acted real friendly towards him, and said the duke's
great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of Bilgewater was a good
deal thought of by _his_ father, and was allowed to come to the palace
considerable; but the duke stayed huffy a good while, till by and by the
king says:

The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it. Â It took
away all the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it, because
it would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the
raft; for what you want, above all things, on a raft, is for everybody
to be satisfied, and feel right and kind towards the others.

It didn't take me long to make up my mind that these liars warn't no
kings nor dukes at all, but just low-down humbugs and frauds. Â But I
never said nothing, never let on; kept it to myself; it's the best way;
then you don't have no quarrels, and don't get into no trouble. Â If they
wanted us to call them kings and dukes, I hadn't no objections, 'long as
it would keep peace in the family; and it warn't no use to tell Jim, so
I didn't tell him. Â If I never learnt nothing else out of pap, I learnt
that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them
have their own way.

THEY asked us considerable many questions; wanted to know what we
covered up the raft that way for, and laid by in the daytime instead of
runningÂ—was Jim a runaway nigger? Â Says I:

"My folks was living in Pike County, in Missouri, where I was born, and
they all died off but me and pa and my brother Ike. Â Pa, he 'lowed
he'd break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben, who's got a little
one-horse place on the river, forty-four mile below Orleans. Â Pa was
pretty poor, and had some debts; so when he'd squared up there warn't
nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger, Jim. Â That warn't
enough to take us fourteen hundred mile, deck passage nor no other way.
Â Well, when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day; he ketched
this piece of a raft; so we reckoned we'd go down to Orleans on it.
Â Pa's luck didn't hold out; a steamboat run over the forrard corner of
the raft one night, and we all went overboard and dove under the wheel;
Jim and me come up all right, but pa was drunk, and Ike was only four
years old, so they never come up no more. Â Well, for the next day or
two we had considerable trouble, because people was always coming out in
skiffs and trying to take Jim away from me, saying they believed he was
a runaway nigger. Â We don't run daytimes no more now; nights they don't
bother us."

Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain; the heat
lightning was squirting around low down in the sky, and the leaves was
beginning to shiverÂ—it was going to be pretty ugly, it was easy to see
that. Â So the duke and the king went to overhauling our wigwam, to see
what the beds was like. Â My bed was a straw tick better than Jim's,
which was a corn-shuck tick; there's always cobs around about in a shuck
tick, and they poke into you and hurt; and when you roll over the dry
shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; it
makes such a rustling that you wake up. Â Well, the duke allowed he would
take my bed; but the king allowed he wouldn't. Â He says:

Jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute, being afraid there was
going to be some more trouble amongst them; so we was pretty glad when
the duke says:

I had the middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sleepy by that time,
so Jim he said he would stand the first half of it for me; he was always
mighty good that way, Jim was. Â I crawled into the wigwam, but the king
and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there warn't no show for
me; so I laid outsideÂ—I didn't mind the rain, because it was warm, and
the waves warn't running so high now. Â About two they come up again,
though, and Jim was going to call me; but he changed his mind, because
he reckoned they warn't high enough yet to do any harm; but he was
mistaken about that, for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a
regular ripper and washed me overboard. Â It most killed Jim a-laughing.
Â He was the easiest nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway.

I took the watch, and Jim he laid down and snored away; and by and by
the storm let up for good and all; and the first cabin-light that showed
I rousted him out, and we slid the raft into hiding quarters for the
day.

There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend, and
after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run
in daylight without it being dangersome for Jim; so he allowed he would
go down to the town and fix that thing. Â The king allowed he would go,
too, and see if he couldn't strike something. Â We was out of coffee, so
Jim said I better go along with them in the canoe and get some.

Then he showed us another little job he'd printed and hadn't charged
for, because it was for us. Â It had a picture of a runaway nigger with
a bundle on a stick over his shoulder, and "$200 reward" under it. Â The
reading was all about Jim, and just described him to a dot. Â It said
he run away from St. Jacques' plantation, forty mile below New Orleans,
last winter, and likely went north, and whoever would catch him and send
him back he could have the reward and expenses.

"Now," says the duke, "after to-night we can run in the daytime if we
want to. Â Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim hand and foot
with a rope, and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we
captured him up the river, and were too poor to travel on a steamboat,
so we got this little raft on credit from our friends and are going down
to get the reward. Â Handcuffs and chains would look still better on Jim,
but it wouldn't go well with the story of us being so poor. Â Too much
like jewelry. Â Ropes are the correct thingÂ—we must preserve the unities,
as we say on the boards."

When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning, he says:

I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French, so he could hear
what it was like; but he said he had been in this country so long, and
had so much trouble, he'd forgot it.

The first chance we got, the duke he had some show bills printed; and
after that, for two or three days as we floated along, the raft was a
most uncommon lively place, for there warn't nothing but sword-fighting
and rehearsingÂ—as the duke called itÂ—going on all the time. One morning,
when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw, we come in sight
of a little one-horse town in a big bend; so we tied up about
three-quarters of a mile above it, in the mouth of a crick which was
shut in like a tunnel by the cypress trees, and all of us but Jim took
the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance in that
place for our show.

Next day you couldn't hear nothing around that town but how splendid
that show was. Â House was jammed again that night, and we sold this
crowd the same way. Â When me and the king and the duke got home to the
raft we all had a supper; and by and by, about midnight, they made Jim
and me back her out and float her down the middle of the river, and
fetch her in and hide her about two mile below town.

Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five dollars in that
three nights. Â I never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that
before. Â By and by, when they was asleep and snoring, Jim says:

"You read about them onceÂ—you'll see. Â Look at Henry the Eight; this 'n
's a Sunday-school Superintendent to _him_. Â And look at Charles Second,
and Louis Fourteen, and Louis Fifteen, and James Second, and Edward
Second, and Richard Third, and forty more; besides all them Saxon
heptarchies that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain. Â My,
you ought to seen old Henry the Eight when he was in bloom. Â He _was_ a
blossom. Â He used to marry a new wife every day, and chop off her head
next morning. Â And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was
ordering up eggs. Â "Fetch up Nell Gwynn," he says. Â They fetch her up.
Next morning, "Chop off her head!" Â And they chop it off. Â "Fetch up
Jane Shore," he says; and up she comes, Next morning, "Chop off her
head'Â—and they chop it off. Â "Ring up Fair Rosamun." Â Fair Rosamun
answers the bell. Â Next morning, "Chop off her head." Â And he made every
one of them tell him a tale every night; and he kept that up till he had
hogged a thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a
book, and called it Domesday BookÂ—which was a good name and stated the
case. Â You don't know kings, Jim, but I know them; and this old rip
of ourn is one of the cleanest I've struck in history. Â Well, Henry he
takes a notion he wants to get up some trouble with this country. How
does he go at itÂ—give notice?Â—give the country a show? Â No. Â All of a
sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbor overboard, and whacks
out a declaration of independence, and dares them to come on. Â That was
_his_ styleÂ—he never give anybody a chance. Â He had suspicions of his
father, the Duke of Wellington. Â Well, what did he do? Â Ask him to show
up? Â NoÂ—drownded him in a butt of mamsey, like a cat. Â S'pose people
left money laying around where he wasÂ—what did he do? Â He collared it.
Â S'pose he contracted to do a thing, and you paid him, and didn't set
down there and see that he done itÂ—what did he do? Â He always done the
other thing. S'pose he opened his mouthÂ—what then? Â If he didn't shut it
up powerful quick he'd lose a lie every time. Â That's the kind of a bug
Henry was; and if we'd a had him along 'stead of our kings he'd a fooled
that town a heap worse than ourn done. Â I don't say that ourn is lambs,
because they ain't, when you come right down to the cold facts; but they
ain't nothing to _that_ old ram, anyway. Â All I say is, kings is kings,
and you got to make allowances. Â Take them all around, they're a mighty
ornery lot. It's the way they're raised."

"Well, they all do, Jim. Â We can't help the way a king smells; history
don't tell no way."

"It's the way I feel, too, Jim. Â But we've got them on our hands, and we
got to remember what they are, and make allowances. Â Sometimes I wish we
could hear of a country that's out of kings."

What was the use to tell Jim these warn't real kings and dukes? Â It
wouldn't a done no good; and, besides, it was just as I said: Â you
couldn't tell them from the real kind.

I went to sleep, and Jim didn't call me when it was my turn. Â He often
done that. Â When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with
his head down betwixt his knees, moaning and mourning to himself. Â I
didn't take notice nor let on. Â I knowed what it was about. Â He was
thinking about his wife and his children, away up yonder, and he was low
and homesick; because he hadn't ever been away from home before in his
life; and I do believe he cared just as much for his people as white
folks does for their'n. Â It don't seem natural, but I reckon it's so.
Â He was often moaning and mourning that way nights, when he judged I
was asleep, and saying, "Po' little "Lizabeth! po' little Johnny! it's
mighty hard; I spec' I ain't ever gwyne to see you no mo', no mo'!" Â He
was a mighty good nigger, Jim was.

"En wid dat I fetch' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin'.
Den I went into de yuther room, en 'uz gone 'bout ten minutes; en when
I come back dah was dat do' a-stannin' open _yit_, en dat chile stannin'
mos' right in it, a-lookin' down and mournin', en de tears runnin' down.
Â My, but I _wuz_ mad! Â I was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis' denÂ—it was a
do' dat open innerdsÂ—jis' den, 'long come de wind en slam it to, behine
de chile, ker-BLAM!Â—en my lan', de chile never move'! Â My breff mos'
hop outer me; en I feel soÂ—soÂ—I doan' know HOW I feel. Â I crope out,
all a-tremblin', en crope aroun' en open de do' easy en slow, en poke my
head in behine de chile, sof' en still, en all uv a sudden I says POW!
jis' as loud as I could yell. Â _She never budge!_ Â Oh, Huck, I bust out
a-cryin' en grab her up in my arms, en say, "Oh, de po' little thing!
Â De Lord God Amighty fogive po' ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne to fogive
hisself as long's he live!" Â Oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, Huck, plumb
deef en dumbÂ—en I'd ben a-treat'n her so!"

NEXT day, towards night, we laid up under a little willow towhead out in
the middle, where there was a village on each side of the river, and the
duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns. Â Jim
he spoke to the duke, and said he hoped it wouldn't take but a few
hours, because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to
lay all day in the wigwam tied with the rope. Â You see, when we left him
all alone we had to tie him, because if anybody happened on to him all
by himself and not tied it wouldn't look much like he was a runaway
nigger, you know. So the duke said it _was_ kind of hard to have to lay
roped all day, and he'd cipher out some way to get around it.

He was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it. Â He dressed
Jim up in King Lear's outfitÂ—it was a long curtain-calico gown, and a
white horse-hair wig and whiskers; and then he took his theater paint
and painted Jim's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead,
dull, solid blue, like a man that's been drownded nine days. Â Blamed if
he warn't the horriblest looking outrage I ever see. Â Then the duke took
and wrote out a sign on a shingle so:

And he nailed that shingle to a lath, and stood the lath up four or five
foot in front of the wigwam. Â Jim was satisfied. Â He said it was a sight
better than lying tied a couple of years every day, and trembling all
over every time there was a sound. Â The duke told him to make himself
free and easy, and if anybody ever come meddling around, he must hop
out of the wigwam, and carry on a little, and fetch a howl or two like
a wild beast, and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone.
Â Which was sound enough judgment; but you take the average man, and he
wouldn't wait for him to howl. Â Why, he didn't only look like he was
dead, he looked considerable more than that.

These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again, because there was
so much money in it, but they judged it wouldn't be safe, because maybe
the news might a worked along down by this time. Â They couldn't hit no
project that suited exactly; so at last the duke said he reckoned he'd
lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he couldn't put up
something on the Arkansaw village; and the king he allowed he would drop
over to t'other village without any plan, but just trust in Providence
to lead him the profitable wayÂ—meaning the devil, I reckon. Â We had all
bought store clothes where we stopped last; and now the king put his'n
on, and he told me to put mine on. Â I done it, of course. Â The king's
duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy. Â I never
knowed how clothes could change a body before. Â Why, before, he looked
like the orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he'd take off
his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile, he looked that grand
and good and pious that you'd say he had walked right out of the ark,
and maybe was old Leviticus himself. Â Jim cleaned up the canoe, and I
got my paddle ready. Â There was a big steamboat laying at the shore away
up under the point, about three mile above the townÂ—been there a couple
of hours, taking on freight. Â Says the king:

Saying them words put a good idea in my head. Â I see how maybe I could
get me and Jim rid of the frauds; get them jailed here, and then leave.
But I didn't want to run the raft in the daytime without anybody aboard
to answer questions but me; so I didn't want the plan to begin working
till pretty late to-night. Â I says:

"Out with you, Jim, and set her loose! Â Glory be to goodness, we're shut
of them!"

Jim lit out, and was a-coming for me with both arms spread, he was so
full of joy; but when I glimpsed him in the lightning my heart shot up
in my mouth and I went overboard backwards; for I forgot he was old King
Lear and a drownded A-rab all in one, and it most scared the livers and
lights out of me. Â But Jim fished me out, and was going to hug me and
bless me, and so on, he was so glad I was back and we was shut of the
king and the duke, but I says:

"Honest, I'll tell you everything just as it happened, your majesty.
Â The man that had a-holt of me was very good to me, and kept saying he
had a boy about as big as me that died last year, and he was sorry
to see a boy in such a dangerous fix; and when they was all took by
surprise by finding the gold, and made a rush for the coffin, he lets go
of me and whispers, "Heel it now, or they'll hang ye, sure!" and I lit
out. Â It didn't seem no good for _me_ to stayÂ—I couldn't do nothing,
and I didn't want to be hung if I could get away. Â So I never stopped
running till I found the canoe; and when I got here I told Jim to hurry,
or they'd catch me and hang me yet, and said I was afeard you and the
duke wasn't alive now, and I was awful sorry, and so was Jim, and was
awful glad when we see you coming; you may ask Jim if I didn't."

Jim said it was so; and the king told him to shut up, and said, "Oh,
yes, it's _mighty_ likely!" and shook me up again, and said he reckoned
he'd drownd me. Â But the duke says:

So the king sneaked into the wigwam and took to his bottle for comfort,
and before long the duke tackled HIS bottle; and so in about a half an
hour they was as thick as thieves again, and the tighter they got the
lovinger they got, and went off a-snoring in each other's arms. Â They
both got powerful mellow, but I noticed the king didn't get mellow
enough to forget to remember to not deny about hiding the money-bag
again. Â That made me feel easy and satisfied. Â Of course when they got
to snoring we had a long gabble, and I told Jim everything.

And at last they took a change and begun to lay their heads together in
the wigwam and talk low and confidential two or three hours at a time.
Jim and me got uneasy. Â We didn't like the look of it. Â We judged they
was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever. Â We turned it
over and over, and at last we made up our minds they was going to break
into somebody's house or store, or was going into the counterfeit-money
business, or something. So then we was pretty scared, and made up an
agreement that we wouldn't have nothing in the world to do with such
actions, and if we ever got the least show we would give them the cold
shake and clear out and leave them behind. Well, early one morning we
hid the raft in a good, safe place about two mile below a little bit of
a shabby village named Pikesville, and the king he went ashore and told
us all to stay hid whilst he went up to town and smelt around to see
if anybody had got any wind of the Royal Nonesuch there yet. ("House to
rob, you _mean_," says I to myself; "and when you get through robbing it
you'll come back here and wonder what has become of me and Jim and the
raftÂ—and you'll have to take it out in wondering.") And he said if he
warn't back by midday the duke and me would know it was all right, and
we was to come along.

So we stayed where we was. Â The duke he fretted and sweated around, and
was in a mighty sour way. Â He scolded us for everything, and we couldn't
seem to do nothing right; he found fault with every little thing.
Something was a-brewing, sure. Â I was good and glad when midday come
and no king; we could have a change, anywayÂ—and maybe a chance for _the_
change on top of it. Â So me and the duke went up to the village, and
hunted around there for the king, and by and by we found him in the
back room of a little low doggery, very tight, and a lot of loafers
bullyragging him for sport, and he a-cussing and a-threatening with all
his might, and so tight he couldn't walk, and couldn't do nothing to
them. Â The duke he begun to abuse him for an old fool, and the king
begun to sass back, and the minute they was fairly at it I lit out and
shook the reefs out of my hind legs, and spun down the river road like
a deer, for I see our chance; and I made up my mind that it would be a
long day before they ever see me and Jim again. Â I got down there all
out of breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out:

"Set her loose, Jim! we're all right now!"

But there warn't no answer, and nobody come out of the wigwam. Â Jim was
gone! Â I set up a shoutÂ—and then anotherÂ—and then another one; and run
this way and that in the woods, whooping and screeching; but it warn't
no useÂ—old Jim was gone. Â Then I set down and cried; I couldn't help
it. But I couldn't set still long. Â Pretty soon I went out on the road,
trying to think what I better do, and I run across a boy walking, and
asked him if he'd seen a strange nigger dressed so and so, and he says:

I didn't have none, so he left. Â I went to the raft, and set down in the
wigwam to think. Â But I couldn't come to nothing. Â I thought till I wore
my head sore, but I couldn't see no way out of the trouble. Â After all
this long journey, and after all we'd done for them scoundrels, here it
was all come to nothing, everything all busted up and ruined, because
they could have the heart to serve Jim such a trick as that, and make
him a slave again all his life, and amongst strangers, too, for forty
dirty dollars.

Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to
be a slave at home where his family was, as long as he'd _got_ to be a
slave, and so I'd better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to
tell Miss Watson where he was. Â But I soon give up that notion for two
things: she'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness
for leaving her, and so she'd sell him straight down the river again;
and if she didn't, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger,
and they'd make Jim feel it all the time, and so he'd feel ornery and
disgraced. And then think of _me_! Â It would get all around that Huck
Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom; and if I was ever to see
anybody from that town again I'd be ready to get down and lick his boots
for shame. Â That's just the way: Â a person does a low-down thing, and
then he don't want to take no consequences of it. Thinks as long as he
can hide it, it ain't no disgrace. Â That was my fix exactly. The more I
studied about this the more my conscience went to grinding me, and the
more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling. And at last, when
it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence
slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being
watched all the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was stealing a
poor old woman's nigger that hadn't ever done me no harm, and now was
showing me there's One that's always on the lookout, and ain't a-going
to allow no such miserable doings to go only just so fur and no further,
I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared. Â Well, I tried the best I
could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung
up wicked, and so I warn't so much to blame; but something inside of me
kept saying, "There was the Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; and
if you'd a done it they'd a learnt you there that people that acts as
I'd been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire."

Miss Watson, your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below
Pikesville, and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the
reward if you send.

I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever
felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now. Â But I didn't do it
straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinkingÂ—thinking
how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being lost
and going to hell. Â And went on thinking. Â And got to thinking over our
trip down the river; and I see Jim before me all the time: Â in the day
and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, and we
a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing. Â But somehow I
couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only the
other kind. Â I'd see him standing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of
calling me, so I could go on sleeping; and see him how glad he was when
I come back out of the fog; and when I come to him again in the swamp,
up there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would always call
me honey, and pet me and do everything he could think of for me, and how
good he always was; and at last I struck the time I saved him by telling
the men we had small-pox aboard, and he was so grateful, and said I was
the best friend old Jim ever had in the world, and the _only_ one he's
got now; and then I happened to look around and see that paper.

It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said. Â And I let
them stay said; and never thought no more about reforming. Â I shoved the
whole thing out of my head, and said I would take up wickedness again,
which was in my line, being brung up to it, and the other warn't. Â And
for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again;
and if I could think up anything worse, I would do that, too; because as
long as I was in, and in for good, I might as well go the whole hog.

"Well," I says, "when I see the king in that doggery yesterday I says
to myself, we can't get him home for hours, till he's soberer; so I went
a-loafing around town to put in the time and wait. Â A man up and offered
me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch
a sheep, and so I went along; but when we was dragging him to the boat,
and the man left me a-holt of the rope and went behind him to shove him
along, he was too strong for me and jerked loose and run, and we after
him. Â We didn't have no dog, and so we had to chase him all over the
country till we tired him out. Â We never got him till dark; then we
fetched him over, and I started down for the raft. Â When I got there and
see it was gone, I says to myself, "They've got into trouble and had to
leave; and they've took my nigger, which is the only nigger I've got in
the world, and now I'm in a strange country, and ain't got no property
no more, nor nothing, and no way to make my living;' so I set down and
cried. Â I slept in the woods all night. Â But what _did_ become of the
raft, then?Â—and JimÂ—poor Jim!"

"So clear out," he says; "and you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want
to. Maybe you can get him to believe that Jim _is_ your niggerÂ—some
idiots don't require documentsÂ—leastways I've heard there's such down
South here. Â And when you tell him the handbill and the reward's bogus,
maybe he'll believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for
getting 'em out. Â Go 'long now, and tell him anything you want to; but
mind you don't work your jaw any _between_ here and there."

So I left, and struck for the back country. Â I didn't look around, but I
kinder felt like he was watching me. Â But I knowed I could tire him out
at that. Â I went straight out in the country as much as a mile before
I stopped; then I doubled back through the woods towards Phelps'. Â I
reckoned I better start in on my plan straight off without fooling
around, because I wanted to stop Jim's mouth till these fellows could
get away. Â I didn't want no trouble with their kind. Â I'd seen all I
wanted to of them, and wanted to get entirely shut of them.

"All right; but wait a minute. Â There's one more thingÂ—a thing that
_nobody_ don't know but me. Â And that is, there's a nigger here that
I'm a-trying to steal out of slavery, and his name is _Jim_Â—old Miss
Watson's Jim."

"What! Â Why, Jim isÂ—"

"Why, there's somebody come! Â I wonder who 'tis? Â Why, I do believe it's
a stranger. Â Jimmy" (that's one of the children) "run and tell Lize to
put on another plate for dinner."

On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered,
and how pap disappeared pretty soon, and didn't come back no more, and
what a stir there was when Jim run away; and I told Tom all about our
Royal Nonesuch rapscallions, and as much of the raft voyage as I had
time to; and as we struck into the town and up through the the middle of
it--it was as much as half-after eight, thenÂ—here comes a raging rush of
people with torches, and an awful whooping and yelling, and banging tin
pans and blowing horns; and we jumped to one side to let them go by;
and as they went by I see they had the king and the duke astraddle of a
railÂ—that is, I knowed it _was_ the king and the duke, though they was
all over tar and feathers, and didn't look like nothing in the
world that was humanÂ—just looked like a couple of monstrous big
soldier-plumes. Â Well, it made me sick to see it; and I was sorry for
them poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like I couldn't ever feel any
hardness against them any more in the world. Â It was a dreadful thing to
see. Â Human beings _can_ be awful cruel to one another.

"Looky here, Huck, what fools we are to not think of it before! Â I bet I
know where Jim is."

"Well, the nigger unlocked the padlock when he went in, and he locked it
again when he came out. Â He fetched uncle a key about the time we got up
from tableÂ—same key, I bet. Â Watermelon shows man, lock shows prisoner;
and it ain't likely there's two prisoners on such a little plantation,
and where the people's all so kind and good. Â Jim's the prisoner. Â All
rightÂ—I'm glad we found it out detective fashion; I wouldn't give shucks
for any other way. Â Now you work your mind, and study out a plan to
steal Jim, and I will study out one, too; and we'll take the one we like
the best."

"My plan is this," I says. Â "We can easy find out if it's Jim in there.
Then get up my canoe to-morrow night, and fetch my raft over from the
island. Â Then the first dark night that comes steal the key out of the
old man's britches after he goes to bed, and shove off down the river
on the raft with Jim, hiding daytimes and running nights, the way me and
Jim used to do before. Â Wouldn't that plan work?"

And it didn't. Â He told me what it was, and I see in a minute it was
worth fifteen of mine for style, and would make Jim just as free a man
as mine would, and maybe get us all killed besides. Â So I was satisfied,
and said we would waltz in on it. Â I needn't tell what it was here,
because I knowed it wouldn't stay the way, it was. Â I knowed he would be
changing it around every which way as we went along, and heaving in new
bullinesses wherever he got a chance. Â And that is what he done.

"Here's the ticket. Â This hole's big enough for Jim to get through if we
wrench off the board."

In the morning we was up at break of day, and down to the nigger cabins
to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger that fed JimÂ—if it
_was_ Jim that was being fed. Â The niggers was just getting through
breakfast and starting for the fields; and Jim's nigger was piling up
a tin pan with bread and meat and things; and whilst the others was
leaving, the key come from the house.

So, drat him, we went along, but I didn't like it much. Â When we got in
we couldn't hardly see anything, it was so dark; but Jim was there, sure
enough, and could see us; and he sings out:

Then he turns to Jim, and looks him over like he never see him before,
and says:

"No, sah," says Jim; "I hain't said nothing, sah."

Tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn't tell nobody; and told him to
buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; and then looks at Jim, and
says:

"I wonder if Uncle Silas is going to hang this nigger. Â If I was to
catch a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run away, I wouldn't give
him up, I'd hang him." Â And whilst the nigger stepped to the door to
look at the dime and bite it to see if it was good, he whispers to Jim
and says:

Jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it; then the nigger
come back, and we said we'd come again some time if the nigger wanted
us to; and he said he would, more particular if it was dark, because the
witches went for him mostly in the dark, and it was good to have folks
around then.

"Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be.
And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan.
Â There ain't no watchman to be druggedÂ—now there _ought_ to be a
watchman. Â There ain't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to. Â And
there's Jim chained by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of his
bed: Â why, all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off
the chain. Â And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the
punkin-headed nigger, and don't send nobody to watch the nigger. Â Jim
could a got out of that window-hole before this, only there wouldn't be
no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg. Â Why, drat it,
Huck, it's the stupidest arrangement I ever see. You got to invent _all_
the difficulties. Â Well, we can't help it; we got to do the best we can
with the materials we've got. Anyhow, there's one thingÂ—there's more
honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers,
where there warn't one of them furnished to you by the people who it was
their duty to furnish them, and you had to contrive them all out of your
own head. Â Now look at just that one thing of the lantern. Â When you
come down to the cold facts, we simply got to _let on_ that a lantern's
resky. Â Why, we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to,
I believe. Â Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up something to
make a saw out of the first chance we get."

"What do we _want_ of it? Â Hain't we got to saw the leg of Jim's bed
off, so as to get the chain loose?"

"Why, to saw Jim's leg off," he says.

"Well, some of the best authorities has done it. Â They couldn't get the
chain off, so they just cut their hand off and shoved. Â And a leg would
be better still. Â But we got to let that go. Â There ain't necessity
enough in this case; and, besides, Jim's a nigger, and wouldn't
understand the reasons for it, and how it's the custom in Europe; so
we'll let it go. Â But there's one thingÂ—he can have a rope ladder; we
can tear up our sheets and make him a rope ladder easy enough. Â And we
can send it to him in a pie; it's mostly done that way. Â And I've et
worse pies."

"Why, Tom Sawyer, how you talk," I says; "Jim ain't got no use for a
rope ladder."

"Well," I says, "if it's in the regulations, and he's got to have
it, all right, let him have it; because I don't wish to go back on no
regulations; but there's one thing, Tom SawyerÂ—if we go to tearing up
our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder, we're going to get into trouble
with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you're born. Â Now, the way I look at
it, a hickry-bark ladder don't cost nothing, and don't waste nothing,
and is just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick,
as any rag ladder you can start; and as for Jim, he ain't had no
experience, and so he don't care what kind of aÂ—"

"Want it for Jim to keep a journal on."

"Journal your grannyÂ—_Jim_ can't write."

"Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that's the common sort
and women; the best authorities uses their own blood. Â Jim can do that;
and when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message
to let the world know where he's captivated, he can write it on the
bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window. Â The
Iron Mask always done that, and it's a blame' good way, too."

"Jim ain't got no tin plates. Â They feed him in a pan."

Along during the morning I borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the
clothes-line; and I found an old sack and put them in it, and we went
down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too. Â I called it borrowing,
because that was what pap always called it; but Tom said it warn't
borrowing, it was stealing. Â He said we was representing prisoners; and
prisoners don't care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody
don't blame them for it, either. Â It ain't no crime in a prisoner to
steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said; it's his right; and
so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we had a perfect right to
steal anything on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves
out of prison with. Â He said if we warn't prisoners it would be a very
different thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery person would steal when
he warn't a prisoner. Â So we allowed we would steal everything there was
that come handy. Â And yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that,
when I stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch and eat it; and he
made me go and give the niggers a dime without telling them what it
was for. Tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we
_needed_. Well, I says, I needed the watermelon. Â But he said I didn't
need it to get out of prison with; there's where the difference was.
Â He said if I'd a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to Jim
to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right. Â So I let it go at
that, though I couldn't see no advantage in my representing a prisoner
if I got to set down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like
that every time I see a chance to hog a watermelon.

"_Jim_ don't know nobody in China."

"All rightÂ—I don't care where he comes out, so he _comes_ out; and Jim
don't, either, I reckon. Â But there's one thing, anywayÂ—Jim's too old to
be dug out with a case-knife. Â He won't last."

"Well, we can't resk being as long as we ought to, because it mayn't
take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Orleans.
Â He'll hear Jim ain't from there. Â Then his next move will be to
advertise Jim, or something like that. Â So we can't resk being as long
digging him out as we ought to. Â By rights I reckon we ought to be
a couple of years; but we can't. Â Things being so uncertain, what I
recommend is this: Â that we really dig right in, as quick as we can;
and after that, we can _let on_, to ourselves, that we was at it
thirty-seven years. Â Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the
first time there's an alarm. Â Yes, I reckon that 'll be the best way."

AS soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the
lightning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our
pile of fox-fire, and went to work. Â We cleared everything out of the
way, about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log. Â Tom
said he was right behind Jim's bed now, and we'd dig in under it, and
when we got through there couldn't nobody in the cabin ever know there
was any hole there, because Jim's counter-pin hung down most to the
ground, and you'd have to raise it up and look under to see the hole.
Â So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight; and then
we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn't see
we'd done anything hardly. Â At last I says:

"Well," he says, "there's excuse for picks and letting-on in a case like
this; if it warn't so, I wouldn't approve of it, nor I wouldn't stand by
and see the rules brokeÂ—because right is right, and wrong is wrong,
and a body ain't got no business doing wrong when he ain't ignorant and
knows better. Â It might answer for _you_ to dig Jim out with a pick,
_without_ any letting on, because you don't know no better; but it
wouldn't for me, because I do know better. Â Gimme a case-knife."

Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house,
for to make some pens for Jim out of, and six tallow candles; and I
hung around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance, and stole three tin
plates. Â Tom says it wasn't enough; but I said nobody wouldn't ever see
the plates that Jim throwed out, because they'd fall in the dog-fennel
and jimpson weeds under the window-holeÂ—then we could tote them back and
he could use them over again. Â So Tom was satisfied. Â Then he says:

"Now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to Jim."

He only just looked scornful, and said something about nobody ever heard
of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to studying. Â By and by he
said he had ciphered out two or three ways, but there warn't no need to
decide on any of them yet. Â Said we'd got to post Jim first.

That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took
one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard
Jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn't wake him. Â Then we
whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half
the job was done. Â We crept in under Jim's bed and into the cabin, and
pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim awhile,
and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle
and gradual. Â He was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us
honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for having us
hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away,
and clearing out without losing any time. Â But Tom he showed him how
unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans,
and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and
not to be the least afraid, because we would see he got away, _sure_.
Â So Jim he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old
times awhile, and then Tom asked a lot of questions, and when Jim told
him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt
Sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat, and
both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says:

So he told Jim how we'd have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and other
large things by Nat, the nigger that fed him, and he must be on the
lookout, and not be surprised, and not let Nat see him open them; and
we would put small things in uncle's coat-pockets and he must steal them
out; and we would tie things to aunt's apron-strings or put them in her
apron-pocket, if we got a chance; and told him what they would be and
what they was for. Â And told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with
his blood, and all that. He told him everything. Â Jim he couldn't see
no sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white folks and knowed
better than him; so he was satisfied, and said he would do it all just
as Tom said.

Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a right down good
sociable time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to
bed, with hands that looked like they'd been chawed. Â Tom was in high
spirits. He said it was the best fun he ever had in his life, and the
most intellectural; and said if he only could see his way to it we would
keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our children to
get out; for he believed Jim would come to like it better and better the
more he got used to it. Â He said that in that way it could be strung out
to as much as eighty year, and would be the best time on record. Â And he
said it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it.

In the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass
candlestick into handy sizes, and Tom put them and the pewter spoon in
his pocket. Â Then we went to the nigger cabins, and while I got Nat's
notice off, Tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a
corn-pone that was in Jim's pan, and we went along with Nat to see how
it would work, and it just worked noble; when Jim bit into it it most
mashed all his teeth out; and there warn't ever anything could a worked
better. Tom said so himself. Jim he never let on but what it was only
just a piece of rock or something like that that's always getting into
bread, you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he
jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first.

And whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light, here comes a
couple of the hounds bulging in from under Jim's bed; and they kept on
piling in till there was eleven of them, and there warn't hardly room
in there to get your breath. Â By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to
door! Â The nigger Nat he only just hollered "Witches" once, and keeled
over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was
dying. Â Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim's meat,
and the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out himself and back
again and shut the door, and I knowed he'd fixed the other door too.
Then he went to work on the nigger, coaxing him and petting him, and
asking him if he'd been imagining he saw something again. Â He raised up,
and blinked his eyes around, and says:

"All right, I'll do it, seeing it's you, and you've been good to us and
showed us the runaway nigger. Â But you got to be mighty careful. Â When
we come around, you turn your back; and then whatever we've put in the
pan, don't you let on you see it at all. Â And don't you look when Jim
unloads the panÂ—something might happen, I don't know what. Â And above
all, don't you _handle_ the witch-things."

So I smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time.
Â Well, she _was_ in a tearing wayÂ—just a-trembling all over, she was so
mad. Â But she counted and counted till she got that addled she'd start
to count in the basket for a spoon sometimes; and so, three times they
come out right, and three times they come out wrong. Â Then she grabbed
up the basket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat
galley-west; and she said cle'r out and let her have some peace, and if
we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she'd skin
us. Â So we had the odd spoon, and dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst
she was a-giving us our sailing orders, and Jim got it all right, along
with her shingle nail, before noon. Â We was very well satisfied with
this business, and Tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took,
because he said _now_ she couldn't ever count them spoons twice alike
again to save her life; and wouldn't believe she'd counted them right if
she _did_; and said that after she'd about counted her head off for the
next three days he judged she'd give it up and offer to kill anybody
that wanted her to ever count them any more.

But that pie was a job; we had no end of trouble with that pie. Â We
fixed it up away down in the woods, and cooked it there; and we got it
done at last, and very satisfactory, too; but not all in one day; and we
had to use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through, and
we got burnt pretty much all over, in places, and eyes put out with
the smoke; because, you see, we didn't want nothing but a crust, and we
couldn't prop it up right, and she would always cave in. Â But of course
we thought of the right way at lastÂ—which was to cook the ladder, too,
in the pie. Â So then we laid in with Jim the second night, and tore
up the sheet all in little strings and twisted them together, and long
before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person
with. Â We let on it took nine months to make it.

Nat didn't look when we put the witch pie in Jim's pan; and we put the
three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under the vittles; and so Jim
got everything all right, and as soon as he was by himself he busted
into the pie and hid the rope ladder inside of his straw tick,
and scratched some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the
window-hole.

MAKING them pens was a distressid tough job, and so was the saw; and Jim
allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all. Â That's the
one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall. Â But he had to have
it; Tom said he'd _got_ to; there warn't no case of a state prisoner not
scrabbling his inscription to leave behind, and his coat of arms.

"Look at Lady Jane Grey," he says; "look at Gilford Dudley; look at old
Northumberland! Â Why, Huck, s'pose it _is_ considerble trouble?Â—what
you going to do?Â—how you going to get around it? Â Jim's _got_ to do his
inscription and coat of arms. Â They all do."

Jim says:

"Oh, you don't understand, Jim; a coat of arms is very different."

"Well," I says, "Jim's right, anyway, when he says he ain't got no coat
of arms, because he hain't."

So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece, Jim
a-making his'n out of the brass and I making mine out of the spoon,
Tom set to work to think out the coat of arms. Â By and by he said he'd
struck so many good ones he didn't hardly know which to take, but there
was one which he reckoned he'd decide on. Â He says:

He'd got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he started in to
finish up the rest of that part of the work, which was to plan out a
mournful inscriptionÂ—said Jim got to have one, like they all done. Â He
made up a lot, and wrote them out on a paper, and read them off, so:

Tom's voice trembled whilst he was reading them, and he most broke down.
When he got done he couldn't no way make up his mind which one for Jim
to scrabble on to the wall, they was all so good; but at last he allowed
he would let him scrabble them all on. Â Jim said it would take him a
year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he
didn't know how to make letters, besides; but Tom said he would block
them out for him, and then he wouldn't have nothing to do but just
follow the lines. Â Then pretty soon he says:

Jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would take him
such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he wouldn't ever get out.
Â But Tom said he would let me help him do it. Â Then he took a look to
see how me and Jim was getting along with the pens. Â It was most pesky
tedious hard work and slow, and didn't give my hands no show to get
well of the sores, and we didn't seem to make no headway, hardly; so Tom
says:

It warn't no slouch of an idea; and it warn't no slouch of a grindstone
nuther; but we allowed we'd tackle it. Â It warn't quite midnight yet,
so we cleared out for the mill, leaving Jim at work. Â We smouched the
grindstone, and set out to roll her home, but it was a most nation tough
job. Sometimes, do what we could, we couldn't keep her from falling
over, and she come mighty near mashing us every time. Â Tom said she was
going to get one of us, sure, before we got through. Â We got her half
way; and then we was plumb played out, and most drownded with sweat. Â We
see it warn't no use; we got to go and fetch Jim. So he raised up his
bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round
his neck, and we crawled out through our hole and down there, and Jim
and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing; and
Tom superintended. Â He could out-superintend any boy I ever see. Â He
knowed how to do everything.

Our hole was pretty big, but it warn't big enough to get the grindstone
through; but Jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough. Â Then Tom
marked out them things on it with the nail, and set Jim to work on them,
with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the
lean-to for a hammer, and told him to work till the rest of his candle
quit on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the grindstone under
his straw tick and sleep on it. Â Then we helped him fix his chain back
on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves. Â But Tom thought of
something, and says:

"You got any spiders in here, Jim?"

"Why, Jim, you wouldn't be afraid of it after a little. Â You could tame
it."

"Jim, don't act so foolish. Â A prisoner's _got_ to have some kind of a
dumb pet, and if a rattlesnake hain't ever been tried, why, there's more
glory to be gained in your being the first to ever try it than any other
way you could ever think of to save your life."

"Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no sich glory. Â Snake take 'n bite
Jim's chin off, den _whah_ is de glory? Â No, sah, I doan' want no sich
doin's."

"But, Jim, you _got_ to have 'emÂ—they all do. Â So don't make no more
fuss about it. Â Prisoners ain't ever without rats. Â There ain't no
instance of it. Â And they train them, and pet them, and learn them
tricks, and they get to be as sociable as flies. Â But you got to play
music to them. Â You got anything to play music on?"

"Yes, _dey_ will, I reck'n, Mars Tom, but what kine er time is _Jim_
havin'? Blest if I kin see de pint. Â But I'll do it ef I got to. Â I
reck'n I better keep de animals satisfied, en not have no trouble in de
house."

So Tom was stumped. Â But he studied it over, and then said Jim would
have to worry along the best he could with an onion. Â He promised
he would go to the nigger cabins and drop one, private, in Jim's
coffee-pot, in the morning. Jim said he would "jis' 's soon have
tobacker in his coffee;" and found so much fault with it, and with the
work and bother of raising the mullen, and jews-harping the rats, and
petting and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things, on top of
all the other work he had to do on pens, and inscriptions, and journals,
and things, which made it more trouble and worry and responsibility to
be a prisoner than anything he ever undertook, that Tom most lost all
patience with him; and said he was just loadened down with more gaudier
chances than a prisoner ever had in the world to make a name for
himself, and yet he didn't know enough to appreciate them, and they was
just about wasted on him. Â So Jim he was sorry, and said he wouldn't
behave so no more, and then me and Tom shoved for bed.

We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her way, and she
allowed these lickings warn't nothing to what she would do if we ever
loaded up the place again with them. Â I didn't mind the lickings,
because they didn't amount to nothing; but I minded the trouble we
had to lay in another lot. Â But we got them laid in, and all the other
things; and you never see a cabin as blithesome as Jim's was when they'd
all swarm out for music and go for him. Â Jim didn't like the spiders,
and the spiders didn't like Jim; and so they'd lay for him, and make it
mighty warm for him. Â And he said that between the rats and the snakes
and the grindstone there warn't no room in bed for him, skasely; and
when there was, a body couldn't sleep, it was so lively, and it was
always lively, he said, because _they_ never all slept at one time, but
took turn about, so when the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck, and
when the rats turned in the snakes come on watch, so he always had one
gang under him, in his way, and t'other gang having a circus over him,
and if he got up to hunt a new place the spiders would take a chance at
him as he crossed over. He said if he ever got out this time he wouldn't
ever be a prisoner again, not for a salary.

Well, by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape.
Â The shirt was sent in early, in a pie, and every time a rat bit Jim he
would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh;
the pens was made, the inscriptions and so on was all carved on the
grindstone; the bed-leg was sawed in two, and we had et up the sawdust,
and it give us a most amazing stomach-ache. Â We reckoned we was all
going to die, but didn't. Â It was the most undigestible sawdust I ever
see; and Tom said the same.

But as I was saying, we'd got all the work done now, at last; and we was
all pretty much fagged out, too, but mainly Jim. Â The old man had wrote
a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come and get their
runaway nigger, but hadn't got no answer, because there warn't no such
plantation; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in the St. Louis and
New Orleans papers; and when he mentioned the St. Louis ones it give me
the cold shivers, and I see we hadn't no time to lose. So Tom said, now
for the nonnamous letters.

"All right, I ain't saying nothing; I'm the servant-girl. Â Who's Jim's
mother?"

"Well, then, you'll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves."

"Not much. Â I'll stuff Jim's clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed
to represent his mother in disguise, and Jim 'll take the nigger woman's
gown off of me and wear it, and we'll all evade together. Â When a
prisoner of style escapes it's called an evasion. Â It's always called
so when a king escapes, f'rinstance. Â And the same with a king's son;
it don't make no difference whether he's a natural one or an unnatural
one."

"We can get along _with_ it, too," he says; "just you slide down cellar
and fetch it. Â And then mosey right down the lightning-rod and come
along. I'll go and stuff the straw into Jim's clothes to represent his
mother in disguise, and be ready to _baa_ like a sheep and shove soon as
you get there."

I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, and lick me, if
she wanted to, and let me get away and tell Tom how we'd overdone this
thing, and what a thundering hornet's-nest we'd got ourselves into, so
we could stop fooling around straight off, and clear out with Jim before
these rips got out of patience and come for us.

"Hurry! Â _Hurry_!" Â I says. Â "Where's Jim?"

So in they come, but couldn't see us in the dark, and most trod on
us whilst we was hustling to get under the bed. Â But we got under all
right, and out through the hole, swift but softÂ—Jim first, me next,
and Tom last, which was according to Tom's orders. Â Now we was in the
lean-to, and heard trampings close by outside. Â So we crept to the door,
and Tom stopped us there and put his eye to the crack, but couldn't make
out nothing, it was so dark; and whispered and said he would listen
for the steps to get further, and when he nudged us Jim must glide out
first, and him last. Â So he set his ear to the crack and listened, and
listened, and listened, and the steps a-scraping around out there all
the time; and at last he nudged us, and we slid out, and stooped down,
not breathing, and not making the least noise, and slipped stealthy
towards the fence in Injun file, and got to it all right, and me and Jim
over it; but Tom's britches catched fast on a splinter on the top
rail, and then he hear the steps coming, so he had to pull loose, which
snapped the splinter and made a noise; and as he dropped in our tracks
and started somebody sings out:

"_Now_, old Jim, you're a free man again, and I bet you won't ever be a
slave no more."

When me and Jim heard that we didn't feel so brash as what we did
before. It was hurting him considerable, and bleeding; so we laid him in
the wigwam and tore up one of the duke's shirts for to bandage him, but
he says:

But me and Jim was consultingÂ—and thinking. Â And after we'd thought a
minute, I says:

"Say it, Jim."

"Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck. Â Ef it wuz _him_ dat 'uz
bein' sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, "Go on
en save me, nemmine 'bout a doctor f'r to save dis one?" Â Is dat like
Mars Tom Sawyer? Â Would he say dat? Â You _bet_ he wouldn't! Â _well_,
den, is _Jim_ gywne to say it? Â No, sahÂ—I doan' budge a step out'n dis
place 'dout a _doctor_, not if it's forty year!"

I knowed he was white inside, and I reckoned he'd say what he did sayÂ—so
it was all right now, and I told Tom I was a-going for a doctor.
Â He raised considerable row about it, but me and Jim stuck to it and
wouldn't budge; so he was for crawling out and setting the raft loose
himself; but we wouldn't let him. Â Then he give us a piece of his mind,
but it didn't do no good.

So I said I would, and left, and Jim was to hide in the woods when he
see the doctor coming till he was gone again.

I allowed another walk would do me good; but I couldn't stir. Â But
before she could break it open she dropped it and runÂ—for she see
something. And so did I. It was Tom Sawyer on a mattress; and that old
doctor; and Jim, in _her_ calico dress, with his hands tied behind him;
and a lot of people. Â I hid the letter behind the first thing that come
handy, and rushed. Â She flung herself at Tom, crying, and says:

I followed the men to see what they was going to do with Jim; and the
old doctor and Uncle Silas followed after Tom into the house. Â The men
was very huffy, and some of them wanted to hang Jim for an example to
all the other niggers around there, so they wouldn't be trying to run
away like Jim done, and making such a raft of trouble, and keeping a
whole family scared most to death for days and nights. Â But the others
said, don't do it, it wouldn't answer at all; he ain't our nigger, and
his owner would turn up and make us pay for him, sure. Â So that cooled
them down a little, because the people that's always the most anxious
for to hang a nigger that hain't done just right is always the very
ones that ain't the most anxious to pay for him when they've got their
satisfaction out of him.

They cussed Jim considerble, though, and give him a cuff or two side the
head once in a while, but Jim never said nothing, and he never let on to
know me, and they took him to the same cabin, and put his own clothes
on him, and chained him again, and not to no bed-leg this time, but to
a big staple drove into the bottom log, and chained his hands, too, and
both legs, and said he warn't to have nothing but bread and water to
eat after this till his owner come, or he was sold at auction because
he didn't come in a certain length of time, and filled up our hole, and
said a couple of farmers with guns must stand watch around about the
cabin every night, and a bulldog tied to the door in the daytime; and
about this time they was through with the job and was tapering off with
a kind of generl good-bye cussing, and then the old doctor comes and
takes a look, and says:

Then the others softened up a little, too, and I was mighty thankful
to that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn; and I was glad it was
according to my judgment of him, too; because I thought he had a good
heart in him and was a good man the first time I see him. Â Then they
all agreed that Jim had acted very well, and was deserving to have some
notice took of it, and reward. Â So every one of them promised, right out
and hearty, that they wouldn't cuss him no more.

"And _Jim_?"

"Â—and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on, for company for
Jim; and then you kept Tom here so long with the butter in his hat that
you come near spiling the whole business, because the men come before
we was out of the cabin, and we had to rush, and they heard us and let
drive at us, and I got my share, and we dodged out of the path and let
them go by, and when the dogs come they warn't interested in us, but
went for the most noise, and we got our canoe, and made for the
raft, and was all safe, and Jim was a free man, and we done it all by
ourselves, and _wasn't_ it bully, Aunty!"

And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting
Jim free in her will; and so, sure enough, Tom Sawyer had gone and took
all that trouble and bother to set a free nigger free! and I couldn't
ever understand before, until that minute and that talk, how he _could_
help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up.

THE first time I catched Tom private I asked him what was his idea, time
of the evasion?Â—what it was he'd planned to do if the evasion worked all
right and he managed to set a nigger free that was already free before?
And he said, what he had planned in his head from the start, if we got
Jim out all safe, was for us to run him down the river on the raft, and
have adventures plumb to the mouth of the river, and then tell him about
his being free, and take him back up home on a steamboat, in style,
and pay him for his lost time, and write word ahead and get out all
the niggers around, and have them waltz him into town with a torchlight
procession and a brass-band, and then he would be a hero, and so would
we. Â But I reckoned it was about as well the way it was.

We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly and Uncle
Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped the doctor nurse Tom,
they made a heap of fuss over him, and fixed him up prime, and give him
all he wanted to eat, and a good time, and nothing to do. Â And we had
him up to the sick-room, and had a high talk; and Tom give Jim forty
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so good,
and Jim was pleased most to death, and busted out, and says:

Jim says, kind of solemn:

"Why, Jim?"

