CHAPTER XXVIII. The Trip to England.Â—"The Brute!"Â—Mary Jane Decides to
Leave.Â—Huck Parting with Mary Jane.Â—Mumps.Â—The Opposition Line.

"Oh, yes; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took; because Peter
said then that he sorter felt like he warn't going to get well this
time. You see, he was pretty old, and George's g'yirls was too young to
be much company for him, except Mary Jane, the red-headed one; and so he
was kinder lonesome after George and his wife died, and didn't seem
to care much to live. Â He most desperately wanted to see HarveyÂ—and
William, too, for that matterÂ—because he was one of them kind that can't
bear to make a will. Â He left a letter behind for Harvey, and said he'd
told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted the rest of the
property divided up so George's g'yirls would be all rightÂ—for George
didn't leave nothing. Â And that letter was all they could get him to put
a pen to."

"It's a pretty long journey. Â But it'll be lovely; wisht I was a-going.
Is Mary Jane the oldest? Â How old is the others?"

"Mary Jane's nineteen, Susan's fifteen, and Joanna's about
fourteenÂ—that's the one that gives herself to good works and has a
hare-lip."

When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed, and the
three girls was standing in the door. Â Mary Jane _was_ red-headed, but
that don't make no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and her
face and her eyes was all lit up like glory, she was so glad her uncles
was come. The king he spread his arms, and Mary Jane she jumped for
them, and the hare-lip jumped for the duke, and there they had it!
Â Everybody most, leastways women, cried for joy to see them meet again
at last and have such good times.

Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind, and the
king he read it out loud and cried over it. Â It give the dwelling-house
and three thousand dollars, gold, to the girls; and it give the tanyard
(which was doing a good business), along with some other houses and
land (worth about seven thousand), and three thousand dollars in gold
to Harvey and William, and told where the six thousand cash was hid down
cellar. Â So these two frauds said they'd go and fetch it up, and have
everything square and above-board; and told me to come with a candle.
Â We shut the cellar door behind us, and when they found the bag
they spilt it out on the floor, and it was a lovely sight, all them
yaller-boys. Â My, the way the king's eyes did shine! Â He slaps the duke
on the shoulder and says:

"Friends all, my poor brother that lays yonder has done generous by
them that's left behind in the vale of sorrers. Â He has done generous by
these yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered, and that's left
fatherless and motherless. Â Yes, and we that knowed him knows that he
would a done _more_ generous by 'em if he hadn't ben afeard o' woundin'
his dear William and me. Â Now, _wouldn't_ he? Â Ther' ain't no question
'bout it in _my_ mind. Â Well, then, what kind o' brothers would it be
that 'd stand in his way at sech a time? Â And what kind o' uncles would
it be that 'd robÂ—yes, _rob_Â—sech poor sweet lambs as these 'at he loved
so at sech a time? Â If I know WilliamÂ—and I _think_ I doÂ—heÂ—well, I'll
jest ask him." He turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to
the duke with his hands, and the duke he looks at him stupid and
leather-headed a while; then all of a sudden he seems to catch his
meaning, and jumps for the king, goo-gooing with all his might for joy,
and hugs him about fifteen times before he lets up. Â Then the king says,
"I knowed it; I reckon _that 'll_ convince anybody the way _he_ feels
about it. Â Here, Mary Jane, Susan, Joanner, take the moneyÂ—take it
_all_. Â It's the gift of him that lays yonder, cold but joyful."

Mary Jane she went for him, Susan and the hare-lip went for the
duke, and then such another hugging and kissing I never see yet. Â And
everybody crowded up with the tears in their eyes, and most shook the
hands off of them frauds, saying all the time:

"I was your father's friend, and I'm your friend; and I warn you as a
friend, and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of
harm and trouble, to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing
to do with him, the ignorant tramp, with his idiotic Greek and Hebrew,
as he calls it. Â He is the thinnest kind of an impostorÂ—has come here
with a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up somewheres, and
you take them for _proofs_, and are helped to fool yourselves by these
foolish friends here, who ought to know better. Â Mary Jane Wilks, you
know me for your friend, and for your unselfish friend, too. Â Now listen
to me; turn this pitiful rascal outÂ—I _beg_ you to do it. Â Will you?"

Mary Jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was handsome! Â She
says:

WELL, when they was all gone the king he asks Mary Jane how they was off
for spare rooms, and she said she had one spare room, which would do for
Uncle William, and she'd give her own room to Uncle Harvey, which was
a little bigger, and she would turn into the room with her sisters and
sleep on a cot; and up garret was a little cubby, with a pallet in it.
The king said the cubby would do for his valleyÂ—meaning me.

So Mary Jane took us up, and she showed them their rooms, which was
plain but nice. Â She said she'd have her frocks and a lot of other traps
took out of her room if they was in Uncle Harvey's way, but he said
they warn't. Â The frocks was hung along the wall, and before them was
a curtain made out of calico that hung down to the floor. Â There was an
old hair trunk in one corner, and a guitar-box in another, and all sorts
of little knickknacks and jimcracks around, like girls brisken up a room
with. Â The king said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for
these fixings, and so don't disturb them. Â The duke's room was pretty
small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby.

That night they had a big supper, and all them men and women was there,
and I stood behind the king and the duke's chairs and waited on them,
and the niggers waited on the rest. Â Mary Jane she set at the head of
the table, with Susan alongside of her, and said how bad the biscuits
was, and how mean the preserves was, and how ornery and tough the fried
chickens wasÂ—and all that kind of rot, the way women always do for to
force out compliments; and the people all knowed everything was tiptop,
and said soÂ—said "How _do_ you get biscuits to brown so nice?" and
"Where, for the land's sake, _did_ you get these amaz'n pickles?" and
all that kind of humbug talky-talk, just the way people always does at a
supper, you know.

"What is it you won't believe, Joe?" says Mary Jane, stepping in with
Susan behind her. Â "It ain't right nor kind for you to talk so to him,
and him a stranger and so far from his people. Â How would you like to be
treated so?"

Then Mary Jane she took another inning, and went in sweet and lovely
againÂ—which was her way; but when she got done there warn't hardly
anything left o' poor Hare-lip. Â So she hollered.

So then I lit outÂ—for bed, I said, meaning some time or another. Â When
I got by myself I went to thinking the thing over. Â I says to myself,
shall I go to that doctor, private, and blow on these frauds? Â NoÂ—that
won't do. He might tell who told him; then the king and the duke would
make it warm for me. Â Shall I go, private, and tell Mary Jane? Â NoÂ—I
dasn't do it. Her face would give them a hint, sure; they've got the
money, and they'd slide right out and get away with it. Â If she was to
fetch in help I'd get mixed up in the business before it was done with,
I judge. Â No; there ain't no good way but one. Â I got to steal that
money, somehow; and I got to steal it some way that they won't suspicion
that I done it. They've got a good thing here, and they ain't a-going
to leave till they've played this family and this town for all they're
worth, so I'll find a chance time enough. I'll steal it and hide it; and
by and by, when I'm away down the river, I'll write a letter and tell
Mary Jane where it's hid. Â But I better hive it tonight if I can,
because the doctor maybe hasn't let up as much as he lets on he has; he
might scare them out of here yet.

So, thinks I, I'll go and search them rooms. Â Upstairs the hall was
dark, but I found the duke's room, and started to paw around it with
my hands; but I recollected it wouldn't be much like the king to let
anybody else take care of that money but his own self; so then I went to
his room and begun to paw around there. Â But I see I couldn't do nothing
without a candle, and I dasn't light one, of course. Â So I judged I'd
got to do the other thingÂ—lay for them and eavesdrop. Â About that time
I hears their footsteps coming, and was going to skip under the bed; I
reached for it, but it wasn't where I thought it would be; but I touched
the curtain that hid Mary Jane's frocks, so I jumped in behind that and
snuggled in amongst the gowns, and stood there perfectly still.

"Because Mary Jane 'll be in mourning from this out; and first you know
the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds
up and put 'em away; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and
not borrow some of it?"

The person coming was Mary Jane. Â She went to the coffin, very soft, and
kneeled down and looked in; then she put up her handkerchief, and I see
she begun to cry, though I couldn't hear her, and her back was to me. Â I
slid out, and as I passed the dining-room I thought I'd make sure them
watchers hadn't seen me; so I looked through the crack, and everything
was all right. Â They hadn't stirred.

I slipped up to bed, feeling ruther blue, on accounts of the thing
playing out that way after I had took so much trouble and run so much
resk about it. Â Says I, if it could stay where it is, all right; because
when we get down the river a hundred mile or two I could write back to
Mary Jane, and she could dig him up again and get it; but that ain't the
thing that's going to happen; the thing that's going to happen is, the
money 'll be found when they come to screw on the lid. Â Then the king
'll get it again, and it 'll be a long day before he gives anybody
another chance to smouch it from him. Of course I _wanted_ to slide
down and get it out of there, but I dasn't try it. Â Every minute it was
getting earlier now, and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin
to stir, and I might get catchedÂ—catched with six thousand dollars in my
hands that nobody hadn't hired me to take care of. Â I don't wish to be
mixed up in no such business as that, I says to myself.

Well, the funeral sermon was very good, but pison long and tiresome; and
then the king he shoved in and got off some of his usual rubbage, and
at last the job was through, and the undertaker begun to sneak up on the
coffin with his screw-driver. Â I was in a sweat then, and watched him
pretty keen. But he never meddled at all; just slid the lid along as
soft as mush, and screwed it down tight and fast. Â So there I was! Â I
didn't know whether the money was in there or not. Â So, says I, s'pose
somebody has hogged that bag on the sly?Â—now how do I know whether
to write to Mary Jane or not? S'pose she dug him up and didn't find
nothing, what would she think of me? Blame it, I says, I might get
hunted up and jailed; I'd better lay low and keep dark, and not write at
all; the thing's awful mixed now; trying to better it, I've worsened it
a hundred times, and I wish to goodness I'd just let it alone, dad fetch
the whole business!

"Honor bright, your majesty, I'm telling you the truth. Â I hain't been
a-near your room since Miss Mary Jane took you and the duke and showed
it to you."

BY and by it was getting-up time. Â So I come down the ladder and started
for down-stairs; but as I come to the girls' room the door was open, and
I see Mary Jane setting by her old hair trunk, which was open and she'd
been packing things in itÂ—getting ready to go to England. Â But she
had stopped now with a folded gown in her lap, and had her face in her
hands, crying. Â I felt awful bad to see it; of course anybody would. Â I
went in there and says:

"Miss Mary Jane, you can't a-bear to see people in trouble, and I
can'tÂ—most always. Â Tell me about it."

"Miss Mary Jane, is there any place out of town a little ways where you
could go and stay three or four days?"

"Miss Mary Jane, I'll tell you what we'll do, and you won't have to stay
at Mr. Lothrop's so long, nuther. Â How fur is it?"

"'Deed, _that_ ain't the ticket, Miss Mary Jane," I says, "by no manner
of means; go _before_ breakfast."

"Yes; never mind about them. Â They've got to stand it yet a while. Â They
might suspicion something if all of you was to go. Â I don't want you to
see them, nor your sisters, nor nobody in this town; if a neighbor was
to ask how is your uncles this morning your face would tell something.
Â No, you go right along, Miss Mary Jane, and I'll fix it with all of
them. I'll tell Miss Susan to give your love to your uncles and say
you've went away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change, or
to see a friend, and you'll be back to-night or early in the morning."

"Well, then, it sha'n't be." Â It was well enough to tell _her_ soÂ—no
harm in it. Â It was only a little thing to do, and no trouble; and it's
the little things that smooths people's roads the most, down here below;
it would make Mary Jane comfortable, and it wouldn't cost nothing. Â Then
I says: Â "There's one more thingÂ—that bag of money."

"I wish I knowed, but I don't. Â I _had_ it, because I stole it from
them; and I stole it to give to you; and I know where I hid it, but I'm
afraid it ain't there no more. Â I'm awful sorry, Miss Mary Jane, I'm
just as sorry as I can be; but I done the best I could; I did honest. Â I
come nigh getting caught, and I had to shove it into the first place I
come to, and runÂ—and it warn't a good place."

"I'd ruther not _tell_ you where I put it, Miss Mary Jane, if you don't
mind letting me off; but I'll write it for you on a piece of paper, and
you can read it along the road to Mr. Lothrop's, if you want to. Â Do you
reckon that 'll do?"

So I wrote: Â "I put it in the coffin. Â It was in there when you was
crying there, away in the night. Â I was behind the door, and I was
mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane."

Well, Mary Jane she lit out the back way, I reckon; because nobody see
her go. Â When I struck Susan and the hare-lip, I says:

"That's the name," I says; "I most forgot it. Â Well, Miss Mary Jane she
told me to tell you she's gone over there in a dreadful hurryÂ—one of
them's sick."

"They don't, don't they? Â You better bet they do with _these_ mumps.
Â These mumps is different. Â It's a new kind, Miss Mary Jane said."

"That's what Miss Mary Jane said."

"Just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see. Â Hain't your uncles
obleegd to get along home to England as fast as they can? Â And do you
reckon they'd be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that
journey by yourselves? Â _you_ know they'll wait for you. Â So fur, so
good. Your uncle Harvey's a preacher, ain't he? Â Very well, then; is a
_preacher_ going to deceive a steamboat clerk? is he going to deceive
a _ship clerk?_Â—so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard? Â Now
_you_ know he ain't. Â What _will_ he do, then? Â Why, he'll say, "It's a
great pity, but my church matters has got to get along the best way they
can; for my niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps,
and so it's my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months
it takes to show on her if she's got it." Â But never mind, if you think
it's best to tell your uncle HarveyÂ—"

"Shucks, and stay fooling around here when we could all be having good
times in England whilst we was waiting to find out whether Mary Jane's
got it or not? Â Why, you talk like a muggins."

"Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that. Â She says, "Tell them to
give Uncle Harvey and William my love and a kiss, and say I've run over
the river to see Mr."Â—Mr.Â—what _is_ the name of that rich family your
uncle Peter used to think so much of?Â—I mean the one thatÂ—"

Everything was all right now. Â The girls wouldn't say nothing because
they wanted to go to England; and the king and the duke would ruther
Mary Jane was off working for the auction than around in reach of
Doctor Robinson. Â I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neatÂ—I
reckoned Tom Sawyer couldn't a done it no neater himself. Â Of course he
would a throwed more style into it, but I can't do that very handy, not
being brung up to it.

As we went by our house I wished I hadn't sent Mary Jane out of town;
because now if I could tip her the wink she'd light out and save me, and
blow on our dead-beats.

Well, we swarmed along down the river road, just carrying on like
wildcats; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up, and the
lightning beginning to wink and flitter, and the wind to shiver amongst
the leaves. This was the most awful trouble and most dangersome I ever
was in; and I was kinder stunned; everything was going so different from
what I had allowed for; stead of being fixed so I could take my own time
if I wanted to, and see all the fun, and have Mary Jane at my back to
save me and set me free when the close-fit come, here was nothing in the
world betwixt me and sudden death but just them tattoo-marks. Â If they
didn't find themÂ—

When I struck the town I see there warn't nobody out in the storm, so
I never hunted for no back streets, but humped it straight through the
main one; and when I begun to get towards our house I aimed my eye and
set it. No light there; the house all darkÂ—which made me feel sorry and
disappointed, I didn't know why. Â But at last, just as I was sailing by,
_flash_ comes the light in Mary Jane's window! and my heart swelled up
sudden, like to bust; and the same second the house and all was behind
me in the dark, and wasn't ever going to be before me no more in this
world. She _was_ the best girl I ever see, and had the most sand.

