CHAPTER XLI. The Doctor.Â—Uncle Silas.Â—Sister Hotchkiss.Â—Aunt Sally in
Trouble.

Aunt Sally talks to Huck

"Don't say yes'mÂ—say Aunt Sally. Â Where'd she get aground?"

"No, I didn't see nobody, Aunt Sally. Â The boat landed just at daylight,
and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town
and out a piece in the country, to put in the time and not get here too
soon; and so I come down the back way."

"Why, Sally, I _couldn't_ miss him along the roadÂ—_you_ know that."

"Oh, don't distress me any more'n I'm already distressed. Â I don't know
what in the world to make of it. Â I'm at my wit's end, and I don't mind
acknowledging 't I'm right down scared. Â But there's no hope that he's
come; for he _couldn't_ come and me miss him. Â Sally, it's terribleÂ—just
terribleÂ—something's happened to the boat, sure!"

In about half an hour Tom's wagon drove up to the front stile, and Aunt
Sally she see it through the window, because it was only about fifty
yards, and says:

"Oh, _do_," says Aunt Sally; "it ain't a bit of trouble to us, not a
bit in the world. Â You must stay. Â It's a long, dusty three mile, and
we can't let you walk. Â And, besides, I've already told 'em to put on
another plate when I see you coming; so you mustn't disappoint us. Â Come
right in and make yourself at home."

Well, he run on, and on, and on, making up stuff about Hicksville and
everybody in it he could invent, and I getting a little nervious, and
wondering how this was going to help me out of my scrape; and at last,
still talking along, he reached over and kissed Aunt Sally right on the
mouth, and then settled back again in his chair comfortable, and was
going on talking; but she jumped up and wiped it off with the back of
her hand, and says:

"Tom, didn't _you_ think Aunt Sally 'd open out her arms and say, "Sid
SawyerÂ—'"

"It's because it warn't _intended_ for any of us to come but Tom," he
says; "but I begged and begged, and at the last minute she let me
come, too; so, coming down the river, me and Tom thought it would be a
first-rate surprise for him to come here to the house first, and for me
to by and by tag along and drop in, and let on to be a stranger. Â But it
was a mistake, Aunt Sally. Â This ain't no healthy place for a stranger
to come."

"Well," I says, "if it's in the regulations, and he's got to have
it, all right, let him have it; because I don't wish to go back on no
regulations; but there's one thing, Tom SawyerÂ—if we go to tearing up
our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder, we're going to get into trouble
with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you're born. Â Now, the way I look at
it, a hickry-bark ladder don't cost nothing, and don't waste nothing,
and is just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick,
as any rag ladder you can start; and as for Jim, he ain't had no
experience, and so he don't care what kind of aÂ—"

That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took
one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard
Jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn't wake him. Â Then we
whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half
the job was done. Â We crept in under Jim's bed and into the cabin, and
pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim awhile,
and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle
and gradual. Â He was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us
honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for having us
hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away,
and clearing out without losing any time. Â But Tom he showed him how
unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans,
and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and
not to be the least afraid, because we would see he got away, _sure_.
Â So Jim he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old
times awhile, and then Tom asked a lot of questions, and when Jim told
him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt
Sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat, and
both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says:

THAT was all fixed. Â So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile
in the back yard, where they keep the old boots, and rags, and pieces
of bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched
around and found an old tin washpan, and stopped up the holes as well as
we could, to bake the pie in, and took it down cellar and stole it full
of flour and started for breakfast, and found a couple of shingle-nails
that Tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and
sorrows on the dungeon walls with, and dropped one of them in Aunt
Sally's apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair, and t'other we stuck
in the band of Uncle Silas's hat, which was on the bureau, because we
heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger's
house this morning, and then went to breakfast, and Tom dropped the
pewter spoon in Uncle Silas's coat-pocket, and Aunt Sally wasn't come
yet, so we had to wait a little while.

"I know it, Sally, and I do try all I can. Â But it oughtn't to be
altogether my fault, because, you know, I don't see them nor have
nothing to do with them except when they're on me; and I don't believe
I've ever lost one of them _off_ of me."

"Why, what else is gone, Sally?"

"Well, Sally, I'm in fault, and I acknowledge it; I've been remiss; but
I won't let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes."

"Clah to goodness I hain't no notion, Miss' Sally. Â She wuz on de
clo'sline yistiddy, but she done gone: Â she ain' dah no mo' now."

"I reely don't know, Sally," he says, kind of apologizing, "or you know
I would tell. Â I was a-studying over my text in Acts Seventeen before
breakfast, and I reckon I put it in there, not noticing, meaning to put
my Testament in, and it must be so, because my Testament ain't in; but
I'll go and see; and if the Testament is where I had it, I'll know I
didn't put it in, and that will show that I laid the Testament down and
took up the spoon, andÂ—"

Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, but he said
we'd got to have it; so he took a think. Â When he had ciphered it out
he told me how we was to do; then we went and waited around the
spoon-basket till we see Aunt Sally coming, and then Tom went to
counting the spoons and laying them out to one side, and I slid one of
them up my sleeve, and Tom says:

"Why, Aunt Sally, there ain't but nine spoons _yet_."

IN the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and
fetched it down, and unstopped the best rat-hole, and in about an hour
we had fifteen of the bulliest kind of ones; and then we took it and put
it in a safe place under Aunt Sally's bed. Â But while we was gone for
spiders little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Elexander Phelps found
it there, and opened the door of it to see if the rats would come out,
and they did; and Aunt Sally she come in, and when we got back she was
a-standing on top of the bed raising Cain, and the rats was doing what
they could to keep off the dull times for her. Â So she took and dusted
us both with the hickry, and we was as much as two hours catching
another fifteen or sixteen, drat that meddlesome cub, and they warn't
the likeliest, nuther, because the first haul was the pick of the flock.
Â I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was.

We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders, and bugs, and frogs, and
caterpillars, and one thing or another; and we like to got a hornet's
nest, but we didn't. Â The family was at home. Â We didn't give it right
up, but stayed with them as long as we could; because we allowed we'd
tire them out or they'd got to tire us out, and they done it. Â Then we
got allycumpain and rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right
again, but couldn't set down convenient. Â And so we went for the snakes,
and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and put them in
a bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it was supper-time, and
a rattling good honest day's work: Â and hungry?Â—oh, no, I reckon not!
Â And there warn't a blessed snake up there when we went backÂ—we didn't
half tie the sack, and they worked out somehow, and left. Â But it didn't
matter much, because they was still on the premises somewheres. Â So
we judged we could get some of them again. Â No, there warn't no real
scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell. Â You'd see
them dripping from the rafters and places every now and then; and they
generly landed in your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most
of the time where you didn't want them. Â Well, they was handsome and
striped, and there warn't no harm in a million of them; but that never
made no difference to Aunt Sally; she despised snakes, be the breed what
they might, and she couldn't stand them no way you could fix it; and
every time one of them flopped down on her, it didn't make no difference
what she was doing, she would just lay that work down and light out. Â I
never see such a woman. Â And you could hear her whoop to Jericho. Â You
couldn't get her to take a-holt of one of them with the tongs. Â And if
she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble out and lift a
howl that you would think the house was afire. Â She disturbed the old
man so that he said he could most wish there hadn't ever been no snakes
created. Â Why, after every last snake had been gone clear out of the
house for as much as a week Aunt Sally warn't over it yet; she warn't
near over it; when she was setting thinking about something you could
touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and she would jump
right out of her stockings. Â It was very curious. Â But Tom said all
women was just so. Â He said they was made that way for some reason or
other.

"I'm his mother. Â I'll hook a gown from Aunt Sally."

Next night we stuck a picture, which Tom drawed in blood, of a skull and
crossbones on the front door; and next night another one of a coffin on
the back door. Â I never see a family in such a sweat. Â They couldn't a
been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts laying for them
behind everything and under the beds and shivering through the air. Â If
a door banged, Aunt Sally she jumped and said "ouch!" if anything fell,
she jumped and said "ouch!" if you happened to touch her, when she
warn't noticing, she done the same; she couldn't face noway and be
satisfied, because she allowed there was something behind her every
timeÂ—so she was always a-whirling around sudden, and saying "ouch," and
before she'd got two-thirds around she'd whirl back again, and say it
again; and she was afraid to go to bed, but she dasn't set up. Â So the
thing was working very well, Tom said; he said he never see a thing work
more satisfactory. He said it showed it was done right.

WE was feeling pretty good after breakfast, and took my canoe and went
over the river a-fishing, with a lunch, and had a good time, and took a
look at the raft and found her all right, and got home late to supper,
and found them in such a sweat and worry they didn't know which end they
was standing on, and made us go right off to bed the minute we was done
supper, and wouldn't tell us what the trouble was, and never let on a
word about the new letter, but didn't need to, because we knowed as much
about it as anybody did, and as soon as we was half up stairs and her
back was turned we slid for the cellar cupboard and loaded up a good
lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up about
half-past eleven, and Tom put on Aunt Sally's dress that he stole and
was going to start with the lunch, but says:

So out he went, and down cellar went I. The hunk of butter, big as
a person's fist, was where I had left it, so I took up the slab of
corn-pone with it on, and blowed out my light, and started up stairs
very stealthy, and got up to the main floor all right, but here comes
Aunt Sally with a candle, and I clapped the truck in my hat, and clapped
my hat on my head, and the next second she see me; and she says:

"I hain't been doing a single thing, Aunt Sally, I hope to gracious if I
have."

I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, and lick me, if
she wanted to, and let me get away and tell Tom how we'd overdone this
thing, and what a thundering hornet's-nest we'd got ourselves into, so
we could stop fooling around straight off, and clear out with Jim before
these rips got out of patience and come for us.

At last she come and begun to ask me questions, but I _couldn't_ answer
them straight, I didn't know which end of me was up; because these men
was in such a fidget now that some was wanting to start right NOW and
lay for them desperadoes, and saying it warn't but a few minutes to
midnight; and others was trying to get them to hold on and wait for the
sheep-signal; and here was Aunty pegging away at the questions, and
me a-shaking all over and ready to sink down in my tracks I was
that scared; and the place getting hotter and hotter, and the butter
beginning to melt and run down my neck and behind my ears; and pretty
soon, when one of them says, "I'M for going and getting in the cabin
_first_ and right _now_, and catching them when they come," I most
dropped; and a streak of butter come a-trickling down my forehead, and
Aunt Sally she see it, and turns white as a sheet, and says:

So then we went to the post-office to get "Sid"; but just as I
suspicioned, he warn't there; so the old man he got a letter out of the
office, and we waited awhile longer, but Sid didn't come; so the old man
said, come along, let Sid foot it home, or canoe it, when he got done
fooling aroundÂ—but we would ride. Â I couldn't get him to let me stay
and wait for Sid; and he said there warn't no use in it, and I must come
along, and let Aunt Sally see we was all right.

When we got home Aunt Sally was that glad to see me she laughed and
cried both, and hugged me, and give me one of them lickings of hern that
don't amount to shucks, and said she'd serve Sid the same when he come.

He come back about ten a little bit uneasy; hadn't run across Tom's
track. Aunt Sally was a good _deal_ uneasy; but Uncle Silas he said
there warn't no occasion to beÂ—boys will be boys, he said, and you'll
see this one turn up in the morning all sound and right. Â So she had
to be satisfied. Â But she said she'd set up for him a while anyway, and
keep a light burning so he could see it.

Then they come out and locked him up. Â I hoped they was going to say he
could have one or two of the chains took off, because they was rotten
heavy, or could have meat and greens with his bread and water; but they
didn't think of it, and I reckoned it warn't best for me to mix in, but
I judged I'd get the doctor's yarn to Aunt Sally somehow or other as
soon as I'd got through the breakers that was laying just ahead of
meÂ—explanations, I mean, of how I forgot to mention about Sid being shot
when I was telling how him and me put in that dratted night paddling
around hunting the runaway nigger.

But I had plenty time. Â Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick-room all day
and all night, and every time I see Uncle Silas mooning around I dodged
him.

Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better, and they said Aunt
Sally was gone to get a nap. Â So I slips to the sick-room, and if I
found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for the family that
would wash. But he was sleeping, and sleeping very peaceful, too; and
pale, not fire-faced the way he was when he come. Â So I set down and
laid for him to wake. Â In about half an hour Aunt Sally comes gliding
in, and there I was, up a stump again! Â She motioned me to be still, and
set down by me, and begun to whisper, and said we could all be joyful
now, because all the symptoms was first-rate, and he'd been sleeping
like that for ever so long, and looking better and peacefuller all the
time, and ten to one he'd wake up in his right mind.

"_Him_?" says Aunt Sally; "the runaway nigger? Â "Deed he hasn't.
Â They've got him back, safe and sound, and he's in that cabin again,
on bread and water, and loaded down with chains, till he's claimed or
sold!"

"I mean every word I _say_, Aunt Sally, and if somebody don't go, _I'll_
go. I've knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there. Â Old Miss
Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed she ever was going to
sell him down the river, and _said_ so; and she set him free in her
will."

Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off of her, and
cried over her, and I found a good enough place for me under the bed,
for it was getting pretty sultry for us, seemed to me. Â And I peeped
out, and in a little while Tom's Aunt Polly shook herself loose and
stood there looking across at Tom over her spectaclesÂ—kind of grinding
him into the earth, you know. Â And then she says:

"Oh, deary me!" says Aunt Sally; "_Is_ he changed so? Â Why, that ain't
_Tom_, it's Sid; Tom'sÂ—Tom'sÂ—why, where is Tom? Â He was here a minute
ago."

Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest-looking persons I ever
seeÂ—except one, and that was Uncle Silas, when he come in and they told
it all to him. Â It kind of made him drunk, as you may say, and he didn't
know nothing at all the rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meeting
sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation, because the
oldest man in the world couldn't a understood it. Â So Tom's Aunt Polly,
she told all about who I was, and what; and I had to up and tell how
I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom
SawyerÂ—she chipped in and says, "Oh, go on and call me Aunt Sally, I'm
used to it now, and 'tain't no need to change"Â—that when Aunt Sally took
me for Tom Sawyer I had to stand itÂ—there warn't no other way, and
I knowed he wouldn't mind, because it would be nuts for him, being
a mystery, and he'd make an adventure out of it, and be perfectly
satisfied. Â And so it turned out, and he let on to be Sid, and made
things as soft as he could for me.

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom and
_Sid_ had come all right and safe, she says to herself:

"Why, I never heard nothing from you," says Aunt Sally.

We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly and Uncle
Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped the doctor nurse Tom,
they made a heap of fuss over him, and fixed him up prime, and give him
all he wanted to eat, and a good time, and nothing to do. Â And we had
him up to the sick-room, and had a high talk; and Tom give Jim forty
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so good,
and Jim was pleased most to death, and busted out, and says:

Tom's most well now, and got his bullet around his neck on a watch-guard
for a watch, and is always seeing what time it is, and so there ain't
nothing more to write about, and I am rotten glad of it, because if I'd
a knowed what a trouble it was to make a book I wouldn't a tackled it,
and ain't a-going to no more. Â But I reckon I got to light out for the
Territory ahead of the rest, because Aunt Sally she's going to adopt me
and sivilize me, and I can't stand it. Â I been there before.

