(Tom Sawyer's Comrade)

CHAPTER I. Civilizing Huck.Â—Miss Watson.Â—Tom Sawyer Waits.

CHAPTER III. A Good Going-over.Â—Grace Triumphant.Â—"One of Tom Sawyers's
Lies".

CHAPTER XLII. Tom Sawyer Wounded.Â—The Doctor's Story.Â—Tom
Confesses.Â—Aunt Polly Arrives.Â—Hand Out Them Letters Â Â Â .

Tom Sawyer's Band of RobbersÂ Â

Tom Sawyer's Band of RobbersÂ Â

"It was Tom Sawyer"

Tom advises a Witch Pie

Tom caught on a Splinter

Tom Sawyer wounded

Tom rose square up in Bed

Tom's Liberality

YOU don't know about me without you have read a book by the name of The
Adventures of Tom Sawyer; but that ain't no matter. Â That book was made
by Mr. Mark Twain, and he told the truth, mainly. Â There was things
which he stretched, but mainly he told the truth. Â That is nothing. Â I
never seen anybody but lied one time or another, without it was Aunt
Polly, or the widow, or maybe Mary. Â Aunt PollyÂ—Tom's Aunt Polly, she
isÂ—and Mary, and the Widow Douglas is all told about in that book, which
is mostly a true book, with some stretchers, as I said before.

Now the way that the book winds up is this: Â Tom and me found the money
that the robbers hid in the cave, and it made us rich. Â We got six
thousand dollars apieceÂ—all gold. Â It was an awful sight of money when
it was piled up. Â Well, Judge Thatcher he took it and put it out
at interest, and it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all the year
roundÂ—more than a body could tell what to do with. Â The Widow Douglas
she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilize me; but it was
rough living in the house all the time, considering how dismal regular
and decent the widow was in all her ways; and so when I couldn't stand
it no longer I lit out. Â I got into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead
again, and was free and satisfied. Â But Tom Sawyer he hunted me up and
said he was going to start a band of robbers, and I might join if I
would go back to the widow and be respectable. Â So I went back.

Now she had got a start, and she went on and told me all about the good
place. Â She said all a body would have to do there was to go around all
day long with a harp and sing, forever and ever. Â So I didn't think
much of it. But I never said so. Â I asked her if she reckoned Tom Sawyer
would go there, and she said not by a considerable sight. Â I was glad
about that, because I wanted him and me to be together.

I set down again, a-shaking all over, and got out my pipe for a smoke;
for the house was all as still as death now, and so the widow wouldn't
know. Well, after a long time I heard the clock away off in the town
go boomÂ—boomÂ—boomÂ—twelve licks; and all still againÂ—stiller than
ever. Pretty soon I heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the
treesÂ—something was a stirring. Â I set still and listened. Â Directly I
could just barely hear a "me-yow! me-yow!" down there. Â That was good!
Â Says I, "me-yow! me-yow!" as soft as I could, and then I put out the
light and scrambled out of the window on to the shed. Â Then I slipped
down to the ground and crawled in among the trees, and, sure enough,
there was Tom Sawyer waiting for me.

So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom. Â He leaned his back up
against a tree, and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched
one of mine. Â My nose begun to itch. Â It itched till the tears come into
my eyes. Â But I dasn't scratch. Â Then it begun to itch on the inside.
Next I got to itching underneath. Â I didn't know how I was going to set
still. This miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes; but
it seemed a sight longer than that. Â I was itching in eleven different
places now. Â I reckoned I couldn't stand it more'n a minute longer,
but I set my teeth hard and got ready to try. Â Just then Jim begun
to breathe heavy; next he begun to snoreÂ—and then I was pretty soon
comfortable again.

Tom he made a sign to meÂ—kind of a little noise with his mouthÂ—and we
went creeping away on our hands and knees. Â When we was ten foot off Tom
whispered to me, and wanted to tie Jim to the tree for fun. Â But I said
no; he might wake and make a disturbance, and then they'd find out I
warn't in. Then Tom said he hadn't got candles enough, and he would slip
in the kitchen and get some more. Â I didn't want him to try. Â I said Jim
might wake up and come. Â But Tom wanted to resk it; so we slid in there
and got three candles, and Tom laid five cents on the table for pay.
Then we got out, and I was in a sweat to get away; but nothing would do
Tom but he must crawl to where Jim was, on his hands and knees, and play
something on him. Â I waited, and it seemed a good while, everything was
so still and lonesome.

As soon as Tom was back we cut along the path, around the garden fence,
and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of
the house. Â Tom said he slipped Jim's hat off of his head and hung it
on a limb right over him, and Jim stirred a little, but he didn't wake.
Afterwards Jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance,
and rode him all over the State, and then set him under the trees again,
and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it. Â And next time Jim told
it he said they rode him down to New Orleans; and, after that, every
time he told it he spread it more and more, till by and by he said they
rode him all over the world, and tired him most to death, and his back
was all over saddle-boils. Â Jim was monstrous proud about it, and he
got so he wouldn't hardly notice the other niggers. Â Niggers would come
miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more looked up to than any
nigger in that country. Â Strange niggers would stand with their mouths
open and look him all over, same as if he was a wonder. Â Niggers is
always talking about witches in the dark by the kitchen fire; but
whenever one was talking and letting on to know all about such things,
Jim would happen in and say, "Hm! Â What you know 'bout witches?" and
that nigger was corked up and had to take a back seat. Â Jim always kept
that five-center piece round his neck with a string, and said it was a
charm the devil give to him with his own hands, and told him he could
cure anybody with it and fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by
saying something to it; but he never told what it was he said to it.
Â Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim anything they
had, just for a sight of that five-center piece; but they wouldn't touch
it, because the devil had had his hands on it. Â Jim was most ruined for
a servant, because he got stuck up on account of having seen the devil
and been rode by witches.

Well, when Tom and me got to the edge of the hilltop we looked away down
into the village and could see three or four lights twinkling, where
there was sick folks, maybe; and the stars over us was sparkling ever
so fine; and down by the village was the river, a whole mile broad, and
awful still and grand. Â We went down the hill and found Jo Harper and
Ben Rogers, and two or three more of the boys, hid in the old tanyard.
Â So we unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two mile and a half,
to the big scar on the hillside, and went ashore.

We went to a clump of bushes, and Tom made everybody swear to keep the
secret, and then showed them a hole in the hill, right in the thickest
part of the bushes. Â Then we lit the candles, and crawled in on our
hands and knees. Â We went about two hundred yards, and then the cave
opened up. Tom poked about amongst the passages, and pretty soon ducked
under a wall where you wouldn't a noticed that there was a hole. Â We
went along a narrow place and got into a kind of room, all damp and
sweaty and cold, and there we stopped. Â Tom says:

"Now, we'll start this band of robbers and call it Tom Sawyer's Gang.
Everybody that wants to join has got to take an oath, and write his name
in blood."

Everybody was willing. Â So Tom got out a sheet of paper that he had
wrote the oath on, and read it. Â It swore every boy to stick to the
band, and never tell any of the secrets; and if anybody done anything to
any boy in the band, whichever boy was ordered to kill that person and
his family must do it, and he mustn't eat and he mustn't sleep till he
had killed them and hacked a cross in their breasts, which was the sign
of the band. And nobody that didn't belong to the band could use that
mark, and if he did he must be sued; and if he done it again he must be
killed. Â And if anybody that belonged to the band told the secrets, he
must have his throat cut, and then have his carcass burnt up and the
ashes scattered all around, and his name blotted off of the list with
blood and never mentioned again by the gang, but have a curse put on it
and be forgot forever.

Everybody said it was a real beautiful oath, and asked Tom if he got
it out of his own head. Â He said, some of it, but the rest was out of
pirate-books and robber-books, and every gang that was high-toned had
it.

Some thought it would be good to kill the _families_ of boys that told
the secrets. Â Tom said it was a good idea, so he took a pencil and wrote
it in. Then Ben Rogers says:

"Well, hain't he got a father?" says Tom Sawyer.

"Nothing only robbery and murder," Tom said.

"Stuff! stealing cattle and such things ain't robbery; it's burglary,"
says Tom Sawyer. Â "We ain't burglars. Â That ain't no sort of style. Â We
are highwaymen. Â We stop stages and carriages on the road, with masks
on, and kill the people and take their watches and money."

"Oh, that's all very fine to _say_, Tom Sawyer, but how in the nation
are these fellows going to be ransomed if we don't know how to do it
to them?Â—that's the thing I want to get at. Â Now, what do you reckon it
is?"

Little Tommy Barnes was asleep now, and when they waked him up he was
scared, and cried, and said he wanted to go home to his ma, and didn't
want to be a robber any more.

So they all made fun of him, and called him cry-baby, and that made him
mad, and he said he would go straight and tell all the secrets. Â But
Tom give him five cents to keep quiet, and said we would all go home and
meet next week, and rob somebody and kill some people.

Ben Rogers said he couldn't get out much, only Sundays, and so he wanted
to begin next Sunday; but all the boys said it would be wicked to do it
on Sunday, and that settled the thing. Â They agreed to get together and
fix a day as soon as they could, and then we elected Tom Sawyer first
captain and Jo Harper second captain of the Gang, and so started home.

We played robber now and then about a month, and then I resigned. Â All
the boys did. Â We hadn't robbed nobody, hadn't killed any people, but
only just pretended. Â We used to hop out of the woods and go charging
down on hog-drivers and women in carts taking garden stuff to market,
but we never hived any of them. Â Tom Sawyer called the hogs "ingots,"
and he called the turnips and stuff "julery," and we would go to the
cave and powwow over what we had done, and how many people we had killed
and marked. Â But I couldn't see no profit in it. Â One time Tom sent a
boy to run about town with a blazing stick, which he called a slogan
(which was the sign for the Gang to get together), and then he said he
had got secret news by his spies that next day a whole parcel of Spanish
merchants and rich A-rabs was going to camp in Cave Hollow with two
hundred elephants, and six hundred camels, and over a thousand "sumter"
mules, all loaded down with di'monds, and they didn't have only a guard
of four hundred soldiers, and so we would lay in ambuscade, as he called
it, and kill the lot and scoop the things. Â He said we must slick up
our swords and guns, and get ready. Â He never could go after even a
turnip-cart but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up for it,
though they was only lath and broomsticks, and you might scour at them
till you rotted, and then they warn't worth a mouthful of ashes more
than what they was before. Â I didn't believe we could lick such a crowd
of Spaniards and A-rabs, but I wanted to see the camels and elephants,
so I was on hand next day, Saturday, in the ambuscade; and when we got
the word we rushed out of the woods and down the hill. Â But there warn't
no Spaniards and A-rabs, and there warn't no camels nor no elephants.
Â It warn't anything but a Sunday-school picnic, and only a primer-class
at that. Â We busted it up, and chased the children up the hollow; but we
never got anything but some doughnuts and jam, though Ben Rogers got
a rag doll, and Jo Harper got a hymn-book and a tract; and then the
teacher charged in, and made us drop everything and cut.

Â I didn't see no di'monds, and I told Tom Sawyer so. Â He said there was
loads of them there, anyway; and he said there was A-rabs there, too,
and elephants and things. Â I said, why couldn't we see them, then? Â He
said if I warn't so ignorant, but had read a book called Don Quixote, I
would know without asking. Â He said it was all done by enchantment. Â He
said there was hundreds of soldiers there, and elephants and treasure,
and so on, but we had enemies which he called magicians; and they had
turned the whole thing into an infant Sunday-school, just out of spite.
Â I said, all right; then the thing for us to do was to go for the
magicians. Â Tom Sawyer said I was a numskull.

I thought all this over for two or three days, and then I reckoned I
would see if there was anything in it. Â I got an old tin lamp and an
iron ring, and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till I sweat
like an Injun, calculating to build a palace and sell it; but it warn't
no use, none of the genies come. Â So then I judged that all that stuff
was only just one of Tom Sawyer's lies. Â I reckoned he believed in the
A-rabs and the elephants, but as for me I think different. Â It had all
the marks of a Sunday-school.

I took the axe and smashed in the door. Â I beat it and hacked it
considerable a-doing it. Â I fetched the pig in, and took him back nearly
to the table and hacked into his throat with the axe, and laid him down
on the ground to bleed; I say ground because it was groundÂ—hard packed,
and no boards. Â Well, next I took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks
in itÂ—all I could dragÂ—and I started it from the pig, and dragged it to
the door and through the woods down to the river and dumped it in, and
down it sunk, out of sight. Â You could easy see that something had been
dragged over the ground. Â I did wish Tom Sawyer was there; I knowed he
would take an interest in this kind of business, and throw in the fancy
touches. Â Nobody could spread himself like Tom Sawyer in such a thing as
that.

By and by she come along, and she drifted in so close that they could
a run out a plank and walked ashore. Â Most everybody was on the boat.
Â Pap, and Judge Thatcher, and Bessie Thatcher, and Jo Harper, and Tom
Sawyer, and his old Aunt Polly, and Sid and Mary, and plenty more.
Â Everybody was talking about the murder, but the captain broke in and
says:

Then I told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart. Â He said Tom
Sawyer couldn't get up no better plan than what I had. Â Then I says:

She said she wouldn't let me go by myself, but her husband would be in
by and by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she'd send him along with me.
Then she got to talking about her husband, and about her relations up
the river, and her relations down the river, and about how much better
off they used to was, and how they didn't know but they'd made a mistake
coming to our town, instead of letting well aloneÂ—and so on and so on,
till I was afeard I had made a mistake coming to her to find out what
was going on in the town; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the
murder, and then I was pretty willing to let her clatter right along.
Â She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars (only
she got it ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was, and what
a hard lot I was, and at last she got down to where I was murdered. Â I
says:

"What's your real name? Â Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob?Â—or what is it?"

"Watchman your grandmother," I says; "there ain't nothing to watch but
the texas and the pilot-house; and do you reckon anybody's going to resk
his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this, when
it's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute?" Â Jim
couldn't say nothing to that, so he didn't try. Â "And besides," I says,
"we might borrow something worth having out of the captain's stateroom.
Â Seegars, I bet youÂ—and cost five cents apiece, solid cash. Â Steamboat
captains is always rich, and get sixty dollars a month, and _they_ don't
care a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it. Â Stick a
candle in your pocket; I can't rest, Jim, till we give her a rummaging.
Â Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing? Â Not for pie, he
wouldn't. He'd call it an adventureÂ—that's what he'd call it; and he'd
land on that wreck if it was his last act. Â And wouldn't he throw style
into it?Â—wouldn't he spread himself, nor nothing? Â Why, you'd think it
was Christopher C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come. Â I wish Tom Sawyer
_was_ here."

By this time Jim was gone for the raft. Â I was just a-biling with
curiosity; and I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn't back out now,
and so I won't either; I'm a-going to see what's going on here. Â So I
dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage, and crept aft
in the dark till there warn't but one stateroom betwixt me and the
cross-hall of the texas. Â Then in there I see a man stretched on the
floor and tied hand and foot, and two men standing over him, and one
of them had a dim lantern in his hand, and the other one had a pistol.
Â This one kept pointing the pistol at the man's head on the floor, and
saying:

"Yes," he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like. Â "I'm the captain
and the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head
deck-hand; and sometimes I'm the freight and passengers. Â I ain't as
rich as old Jim Hornback, and I can't be so blame' generous and good
to Tom, Dick, and Harry as what he is, and slam around money the way he
does; but I've told him a many a time 't I wouldn't trade places with
him; for, says I, a sailor's life's the life for me, and I'm derned if
_I'd_ live two mile out o' town, where there ain't nothing ever goin'
on, not for all his spondulicks and as much more on top of it. Â Says IÂ—"

"Look here, if you're telling the truth you needn't be afraidÂ—nobody'll
hurt you. Â But don't try to budge; stand right where you are. Â Rouse out
Bob and Tom, some of you, and fetch the guns. Â George Jackson, is there
anybody with you?"

"Snatch that light away, Betsy, you old foolÂ—ain't you got any sense?
Put it on the floor behind the front door. Â Bob, if you and Tom are
ready, take your places."

Cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, butter and buttermilkÂ—that is what they
had for me down there, and there ain't nothing better that ever I've
come across yet. Â Buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes,
except the nigger woman, which was gone, and the two young women. Â They
all smoked and talked, and I eat and talked. Â The young women had
quilts around them, and their hair down their backs. Â They all asked me
questions, and I told them how pap and me and all the family was living
on a little farm down at the bottom of Arkansaw, and my sister Mary Ann
run off and got married and never was heard of no more, and Bill went
to hunt them and he warn't heard of no more, and Tom and Mort died,
and then there warn't nobody but just me and pap left, and he was just
trimmed down to nothing, on account of his troubles; so when he died
I took what there was left, because the farm didn't belong to us, and
started up the river, deck passage, and fell overboard; and that was how
I come to be here. Â So they said I could have a home there as long as I
wanted it. Â Then it was most daylight and everybody went to bed, and I
went to bed with Buck, and when I waked up in the morning, drat it all,
I had forgot what my name was. So I laid there about an hour trying to
think, and when Buck waked up I says:

When him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got
up out of their chairs and give them good-day, and didn't set down again
till they had set down. Â Then Tom and Bob went to the sideboard where
the decanter was, and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him, and
he held it in his hand and waited till Tom's and Bob's was mixed, and
then they bowed and said, "Our duty to you, sir, and madam;" and _they_
bowed the least bit in the world and said thank you, and so they drank,
all three, and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of water on the sugar and
the mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their tumblers, and
give it to me and Buck, and we drank to the old people too.

Bob was the oldest and Tom nextÂ—tall, beautiful men with very broad
shoulders and brown faces, and long black hair and black eyes. Â They
dressed in white linen from head to foot, like the old gentleman, and
wore broad Panama hats.

"Yes; right smart chance of funerals. Â But they don't always kill. Â Pa's
got a few buckshot in him; but he don't mind it 'cuz he don't weigh
much, anyway. Â Bob's been carved up some with a bowie, and Tom's been
hurt once or twice."

Everything was all right now. Â The girls wouldn't say nothing because
they wanted to go to England; and the king and the duke would ruther
Mary Jane was off working for the auction than around in reach of
Doctor Robinson. Â I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neatÂ—I
reckoned Tom Sawyer couldn't a done it no neater himself. Â Of course he
would a throwed more style into it, but I can't do that very handy, not
being brung up to it.

Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to
be a slave at home where his family was, as long as he'd _got_ to be a
slave, and so I'd better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to
tell Miss Watson where he was. Â But I soon give up that notion for two
things: she'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness
for leaving her, and so she'd sell him straight down the river again;
and if she didn't, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger,
and they'd make Jim feel it all the time, and so he'd feel ornery and
disgraced. And then think of _me_! Â It would get all around that Huck
Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom; and if I was ever to see
anybody from that town again I'd be ready to get down and lick his boots
for shame. Â That's just the way: Â a person does a low-down thing, and
then he don't want to take no consequences of it. Thinks as long as he
can hide it, it ain't no disgrace. Â That was my fix exactly. The more I
studied about this the more my conscience went to grinding me, and the
more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling. And at last, when
it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence
slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being
watched all the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was stealing a
poor old woman's nigger that hadn't ever done me no harm, and now was
showing me there's One that's always on the lookout, and ain't a-going
to allow no such miserable doings to go only just so fur and no further,
I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared. Â Well, I tried the best I
could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung
up wicked, and so I warn't so much to blame; but something inside of me
kept saying, "There was the Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; and
if you'd a done it they'd a learnt you there that people that acts as
I'd been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire."

She grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped me by both hands
and shook and shook; and the tears come in her eyes, and run down over;
and she couldn't seem to hug and shake enough, and kept saying, "You
don't look as much like your mother as I reckoned you would; but law
sakes, I don't care for that, I'm so glad to see you! Â Dear, dear, it
does seem like I could eat you up! Â Children, it's your cousin Tom!Â—tell
him howdy."

"It's _Tom Sawyer!_"

Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side, and pretty
uncomfortable all up the other. Â Being Tom Sawyer was easy and
comfortable, and it stayed easy and comfortable till by and by I hear a
steamboat coughing along down the river. Â Then I says to myself, s'pose
Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat? Â And s'pose he steps in here any
minute, and sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep
quiet?

SO I started for town in the wagon, and when I was half-way I see a
wagon coming, and sure enough it was Tom Sawyer, and I stopped and
waited till he come along. Â I says "Hold on!" and it stopped alongside,
and his mouth opened up like a trunk, and stayed so; and he swallowed
two or three times like a person that's got a dry throat, and then says:

Well, I let go all holts then, like I was shot. Â It was the most
astonishing speech I ever heardÂ—and I'm bound to say Tom Sawyer fell
considerable in my estimation. Â Only I couldn't believe it. Â Tom Sawyer
a _nigger-stealer!_

In about half an hour Tom's wagon drove up to the front stile, and Aunt
Sally she see it through the window, because it was only about fifty
yards, and says:

Everybody made a rush for the front door, because, of course, a stranger
don't come _every_ year, and so he lays over the yaller-fever, for
interest, when he does come. Â Tom was over the stile and starting for
the house; the wagon was spinning up the road for the village, and we
was all bunched in the front door. Â Tom had his store clothes on, and an
audienceÂ—and that was always nuts for Tom Sawyer. Â In them circumstances
it warn't no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was
suitable. Â He warn't a boy to meeky along up that yard like a sheep; no,
he come ca'm and important, like the ram. Â When he got a-front of us he
lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty, like it was the lid of a box
that had butterflies asleep in it and he didn't want to disturb them,
and says:

Tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, "Too lateÂ—he's out
of sight."

So Tom he thanked them very hearty and handsome, and let himself be
persuaded, and come in; and when he was in he said he was a stranger
from Hicksville, Ohio, and his name was William ThompsonÂ—and he made
another bow.

"Tom, didn't _you_ think Aunt Sally 'd open out her arms and say, "Sid
SawyerÂ—'"

"Why, dear me, I never see such a surprise. Â We warn't looking for _you_
at all, but only Tom. Â Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but
him."

"It's because it warn't _intended_ for any of us to come but Tom," he
says; "but I begged and begged, and at the last minute she let me
come, too; so, coming down the river, me and Tom thought it would be a
first-rate surprise for him to come here to the house first, and for me
to by and by tag along and drop in, and let on to be a stranger. Â But it
was a mistake, Aunt Sally. Â This ain't no healthy place for a stranger
to come."

We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the house and
the kitchen; and there was things enough on that table for seven
familiesÂ—and all hot, too; none of your flabby, tough meat that's laid
in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night and tastes like a hunk of
old cold cannibal in the morning. Â Uncle Silas he asked a pretty long
blessing over it, but it was worth it; and it didn't cool it a bit,
neither, the way I've seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times.
Â There was a considerable good deal of talk all the afternoon, and me
and Tom was on the lookout all the time; but it warn't no use, they
didn't happen to say nothing about any runaway nigger, and we was afraid
to try to work up to it. Â But at supper, at night, one of the little
boys says:

"Pa, mayn't Tom and Sid and me go to the show?"

So there it was!Â—but I couldn't help it. Â Tom and me was to sleep in the
same room and bed; so, being tired, we bid good-night and went up to
bed right after supper, and clumb out of the window and down the
lightning-rod, and shoved for the town; for I didn't believe anybody was
going to give the king and the duke a hint, and so if I didn't hurry up
and give them one they'd get into trouble sure.

On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered,
and how pap disappeared pretty soon, and didn't come back no more, and
what a stir there was when Jim run away; and I told Tom all about our
Royal Nonesuch rapscallions, and as much of the raft voyage as I had
time to; and as we struck into the town and up through the the middle of
it--it was as much as half-after eight, thenÂ—here comes a raging rush of
people with torches, and an awful whooping and yelling, and banging tin
pans and blowing horns; and we jumped to one side to let them go by;
and as they went by I see they had the king and the duke astraddle of a
railÂ—that is, I knowed it _was_ the king and the duke, though they was
all over tar and feathers, and didn't look like nothing in the
world that was humanÂ—just looked like a couple of monstrous big
soldier-plumes. Â Well, it made me sick to see it; and I was sorry for
them poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like I couldn't ever feel any
hardness against them any more in the world. Â It was a dreadful thing to
see. Â Human beings _can_ be awful cruel to one another.

So we poked along back home, and I warn't feeling so brash as I was
before, but kind of ornery, and humble, and to blame, somehowÂ—though
I hadn't done nothing. Â But that's always the way; it don't make no
difference whether you do right or wrong, a person's conscience ain't
got no sense, and just goes for him anyway. Â If I had a yaller dog that
didn't know no more than a person's conscience does I would pison him.
It takes up more room than all the rest of a person's insides, and yet
ain't no good, nohow. Â Tom Sawyer he says the same.

WE stopped talking, and got to thinking. Â By and by Tom says:

What a head for just a boy to have! Â If I had Tom Sawyer's head I
wouldn't trade it off to be a duke, nor mate of a steamboat, nor clown
in a circus, nor nothing I can think of. Â I went to thinking out a plan,
but only just to be doing something; I knowed very well where the right
plan was going to come from. Â Pretty soon Tom says:

Well, one thing was dead sure, and that was that Tom Sawyer was in
earnest, and was actuly going to help steal that nigger out of slavery.
That was the thing that was too many for me. Â Here was a boy that was
respectable and well brung up; and had a character to lose; and folks at
home that had characters; and he was bright and not leather-headed; and
knowing and not ignorant; and not mean, but kind; and yet here he was,
without any more pride, or rightness, or feeling, than to stoop to
this business, and make himself a shame, and his family a shame,
before everybody. Â I _couldn't_ understand it no way at all. Â It was
outrageous, and I knowed I ought to just up and tell him so; and so be
his true friend, and let him quit the thing right where he was and save
himself. And I _did_ start to tell him; but he shut me up, and says:

Tom says:

Betwixt the hut and the fence, on the back side, was a lean-to that
joined the hut at the eaves, and was made out of plank. Â It was as long
as the hut, but narrowÂ—only about six foot wide. Â The door to it was at
the south end, and was padlocked. Â Tom he went to the soap-kettle and
searched around, and fetched back the iron thing they lift the lid with;
so he took it and prized out one of the staples. Â The chain fell down,
and we opened the door and went in, and shut it, and struck a match,
and see the shed was only built against a cabin and hadn't no connection
with it; and there warn't no floor to the shed, nor nothing in it but
some old rusty played-out hoes and spades and picks and a crippled plow.
Â The match went out, and so did we, and shoved in the staple again, and
the door was locked as good as ever. Tom was joyful. Â He says;

Then we started for the house, and I went in the back doorÂ—you only have
to pull a buckskin latch-string, they don't fasten the doorsÂ—but that
warn't romantical enough for Tom Sawyer; no way would do him but he must
climb up the lightning-rod. Â But after he got up half way about three
times, and missed fire and fell every time, and the last time most
busted his brains out, he thought he'd got to give it up; but after he
was rested he allowed he would give her one more turn for luck, and this
time he made the trip.

This nigger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face, and his wool was
all tied up in little bunches with thread. Â That was to keep witches
off. Â He said the witches was pestering him awful these nights, and
making him see all kinds of strange things, and hear all kinds of
strange words and noises, and he didn't believe he was ever witched so
long before in his life. Â He got so worked up, and got to running on so
about his troubles, he forgot all about what he'd been a-going to do.
Â So Tom says:

I hunched Tom, and whispers:

"Why, _Huck_! Â En good _lan_'! ain' dat Misto Tom?"

We could see pretty well now. Â Tom he looked at the nigger, steady and
kind of wondering, and says:

Tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way:

So Tom turns to the nigger, which was looking wild and distressed, and
says, kind of severe:

Tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn't tell nobody; and told him to
buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; and then looks at Jim, and
says:

IT would be most an hour yet till breakfast, so we left and struck down
into the woods; because Tom said we got to have _some_ light to see how
to dig by, and a lantern makes too much, and might get us into trouble;
what we must have was a lot of them rotten chunks that's called
fox-fire, and just makes a soft kind of a glow when you lay them in a
dark place. Â We fetched an armful and hid it in the weeds, and set down
to rest, and Tom says, kind of dissatisfied:

"Why, Tom Sawyer, how you talk," I says; "Jim ain't got no use for a
rope ladder."

"Well," I says, "if it's in the regulations, and he's got to have
it, all right, let him have it; because I don't wish to go back on no
regulations; but there's one thing, Tom SawyerÂ—if we go to tearing up
our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder, we're going to get into trouble
with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you're born. Â Now, the way I look at
it, a hickry-bark ladder don't cost nothing, and don't waste nothing,
and is just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick,
as any rag ladder you can start; and as for Jim, he ain't had no
experience, and so he don't care what kind of aÂ—"

"Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way; but if you'll take my
advice, you'll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline."

"What do we want of a shirt, Tom?"

"Why, Tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a better
one; and quicker, too."

Along during the morning I borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the
clothes-line; and I found an old sack and put them in it, and we went
down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too. Â I called it borrowing,
because that was what pap always called it; but Tom said it warn't
borrowing, it was stealing. Â He said we was representing prisoners; and
prisoners don't care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody
don't blame them for it, either. Â It ain't no crime in a prisoner to
steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said; it's his right; and
so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we had a perfect right to
steal anything on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves
out of prison with. Â He said if we warn't prisoners it would be a very
different thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery person would steal when
he warn't a prisoner. Â So we allowed we would steal everything there was
that come handy. Â And yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that,
when I stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch and eat it; and he
made me go and give the niggers a dime without telling them what it
was for. Tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we
_needed_. Well, I says, I needed the watermelon. Â But he said I didn't
need it to get out of prison with; there's where the difference was.
Â He said if I'd a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to Jim
to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right. Â So I let it go at
that, though I couldn't see no advantage in my representing a prisoner
if I got to set down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like
that every time I see a chance to hog a watermelon.

Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning till everybody was settled
down to business, and nobody in sight around the yard; then Tom he
carried the sack into the lean-to whilst I stood off a piece to keep
watch. Â By and by he come out, and we went and set down on the woodpile
to talk. Â He says:

"Confound it, it's foolish, Tom."

"How long will it take, Tom?"

"Tom, if it ain't unregular and irreligious to sejest it," I says,
"there's an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under the
weather-boarding behind the smoke-house."

AS soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the
lightning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our
pile of fox-fire, and went to work. Â We cleared everything out of the
way, about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log. Â Tom
said he was right behind Jim's bed now, and we'd dig in under it, and
when we got through there couldn't nobody in the cabin ever know there
was any hole there, because Jim's counter-pin hung down most to the
ground, and you'd have to raise it up and look under to see the hole.
Â So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight; and then
we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn't see
we'd done anything hardly. Â At last I says:

"This ain't no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job,
Tom Sawyer."

"Well, then, what we going to do, Tom?"

"_Now_ you're _talking_!" Â I says; "your head gets leveler and leveler
all the time, Tom Sawyer," I says. Â "Picks is the thing, moral or no
moral; and as for me, I don't care shucks for the morality of it, nohow.
Â When I start in to steal a nigger, or a watermelon, or a Sunday-school
book, I ain't no ways particular how it's done so it's done. Â What I
want is my nigger; or what I want is my watermelon; or what I want is my
Sunday-school book; and if a pick's the handiest thing, that's the thing
I'm a-going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that Sunday-school
book out with; and I don't give a dead rat what the authorities thinks
about it nuther."

So then I got a shovel, and then we picked and shoveled, turn about,
and made the fur fly. Â We stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as
long as we could stand up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for
it. When I got up stairs I looked out at the window and see Tom doing
his level best with the lightning-rod, but he couldn't come it, his
hands was so sore. Â At last he says:

Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house,
for to make some pens for Jim out of, and six tallow candles; and I
hung around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance, and stole three tin
plates. Â Tom says it wasn't enough; but I said nobody wouldn't ever see
the plates that Jim throwed out, because they'd fall in the dog-fennel
and jimpson weeds under the window-holeÂ—then we could tote them back and
he could use them over again. Â So Tom was satisfied. Â Then he says:

That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took
one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard
Jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn't wake him. Â Then we
whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half
the job was done. Â We crept in under Jim's bed and into the cabin, and
pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim awhile,
and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle
and gradual. Â He was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us
honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for having us
hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away,
and clearing out without losing any time. Â But Tom he showed him how
unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans,
and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and
not to be the least afraid, because we would see he got away, _sure_.
Â So Jim he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old
times awhile, and then Tom asked a lot of questions, and when Jim told
him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt
Sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat, and
both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says:

So he told Jim how we'd have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and other
large things by Nat, the nigger that fed him, and he must be on the
lookout, and not be surprised, and not let Nat see him open them; and
we would put small things in uncle's coat-pockets and he must steal them
out; and we would tie things to aunt's apron-strings or put them in her
apron-pocket, if we got a chance; and told him what they would be and
what they was for. Â And told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with
his blood, and all that. He told him everything. Â Jim he couldn't see
no sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white folks and knowed
better than him; so he was satisfied, and said he would do it all just
as Tom said.

Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a right down good
sociable time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to
bed, with hands that looked like they'd been chawed. Â Tom was in high
spirits. He said it was the best fun he ever had in his life, and the
most intellectural; and said if he only could see his way to it we would
keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our children to
get out; for he believed Jim would come to like it better and better the
more he got used to it. Â He said that in that way it could be strung out
to as much as eighty year, and would be the best time on record. Â And he
said it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it.

In the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass
candlestick into handy sizes, and Tom put them and the pewter spoon in
his pocket. Â Then we went to the nigger cabins, and while I got Nat's
notice off, Tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a
corn-pone that was in Jim's pan, and we went along with Nat to see how
it would work, and it just worked noble; when Jim bit into it it most
mashed all his teeth out; and there warn't ever anything could a worked
better. Tom said so himself. Jim he never let on but what it was only
just a piece of rock or something like that that's always getting into
bread, you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he
jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first.

And whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light, here comes a
couple of the hounds bulging in from under Jim's bed; and they kept on
piling in till there was eleven of them, and there warn't hardly room
in there to get your breath. Â By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to
door! Â The nigger Nat he only just hollered "Witches" once, and keeled
over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was
dying. Â Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim's meat,
and the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out himself and back
again and shut the door, and I knowed he'd fixed the other door too.
Then he went to work on the nigger, coaxing him and petting him, and
asking him if he'd been imagining he saw something again. Â He raised up,
and blinked his eyes around, and says:

Tom says:

THAT was all fixed. Â So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile
in the back yard, where they keep the old boots, and rags, and pieces
of bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched
around and found an old tin washpan, and stopped up the holes as well as
we could, to bake the pie in, and took it down cellar and stole it full
of flour and started for breakfast, and found a couple of shingle-nails
that Tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and
sorrows on the dungeon walls with, and dropped one of them in Aunt
Sally's apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair, and t'other we stuck
in the band of Uncle Silas's hat, which was on the bureau, because we
heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger's
house this morning, and then went to breakfast, and Tom dropped the
pewter spoon in Uncle Silas's coat-pocket, and Aunt Sally wasn't come
yet, so we had to wait a little while.

My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things, and a hard
piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the
road with a cough, and was shot across the table, and took one of the
children in the eye and curled him up like a fishing-worm, and let a cry
out of him the size of a warwhoop, and Tom he turned kinder blue around
the gills, and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for
about a quarter of a minute or as much as that, and I would a sold out
for half price if there was a bidder. Â But after that we was all right
againÂ—it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of cold.
Uncle Silas he says:

I"D a heard her if she'd a said it to herself, let alone speaking it
out; and I'd a got up and obeyed her if I'd a been dead. Â As we was
passing through the setting-room the old man he took up his hat, and the
shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and he just merely picked it up and
laid it on the mantel-shelf, and never said nothing, and went out. Â Tom
see him do it, and remembered about the spoon, and says:

Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, but he said
we'd got to have it; so he took a think. Â When he had ciphered it out
he told me how we was to do; then we went and waited around the
spoon-basket till we see Aunt Sally coming, and then Tom went to
counting the spoons and laying them out to one side, and I slid one of
them up my sleeve, and Tom says:

"Hang the troublesome rubbage, ther's _ten_ now!" and she looked huffy
and bothered both. Â But Tom says:

So I smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time.
Â Well, she _was_ in a tearing wayÂ—just a-trembling all over, she was so
mad. Â But she counted and counted till she got that addled she'd start
to count in the basket for a spoon sometimes; and so, three times they
come out right, and three times they come out wrong. Â Then she grabbed
up the basket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat
galley-west; and she said cle'r out and let her have some peace, and if
we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she'd skin
us. Â So we had the odd spoon, and dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst
she was a-giving us our sailing orders, and Jim got it all right, along
with her shingle nail, before noon. Â We was very well satisfied with
this business, and Tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took,
because he said _now_ she couldn't ever count them spoons twice alike
again to save her life; and wouldn't believe she'd counted them right if
she _did_; and said that after she'd about counted her head off for the
next three days he judged she'd give it up and offer to kill anybody
that wanted her to ever count them any more.

MAKING them pens was a distressid tough job, and so was the saw; and Jim
allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all. Â That's the
one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall. Â But he had to have
it; Tom said he'd _got_ to; there warn't no case of a state prisoner not
scrabbling his inscription to leave behind, and his coat of arms.

"Why, Mars Tom, I hain't got no coat o' arm; I hain't got nuffn but dish
yer ole shirt, en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat."

"I reckon I knowed that," Tom says, "but you bet he'll have one before
he goes out of thisÂ—because he's going out _right_, and there ain't
going to be no flaws in his record."

So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece, Jim
a-making his'n out of the brass and I making mine out of the spoon,
Tom set to work to think out the coat of arms. Â By and by he said he'd
struck so many good ones he didn't hardly know which to take, but there
was one which he reckoned he'd decide on. Â He says:

"Shucks, Tom," I says, "I think you might tell a person. Â What's a bar
sinister?"

Tom's voice trembled whilst he was reading them, and he most broke down.
When he got done he couldn't no way make up his mind which one for Jim
to scrabble on to the wall, they was all so good; but at last he allowed
he would let him scrabble them all on. Â Jim said it would take him a
year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he
didn't know how to make letters, besides; but Tom said he would block
them out for him, and then he wouldn't have nothing to do but just
follow the lines. Â Then pretty soon he says:

Jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would take him
such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he wouldn't ever get out.
Â But Tom said he would let me help him do it. Â Then he took a look to
see how me and Jim was getting along with the pens. Â It was most pesky
tedious hard work and slow, and didn't give my hands no show to get
well of the sores, and we didn't seem to make no headway, hardly; so Tom
says:

It warn't no slouch of an idea; and it warn't no slouch of a grindstone
nuther; but we allowed we'd tackle it. Â It warn't quite midnight yet,
so we cleared out for the mill, leaving Jim at work. Â We smouched the
grindstone, and set out to roll her home, but it was a most nation tough
job. Sometimes, do what we could, we couldn't keep her from falling
over, and she come mighty near mashing us every time. Â Tom said she was
going to get one of us, sure, before we got through. Â We got her half
way; and then we was plumb played out, and most drownded with sweat. Â We
see it warn't no use; we got to go and fetch Jim. So he raised up his
bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round
his neck, and we crawled out through our hole and down there, and Jim
and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing; and
Tom superintended. Â He could out-superintend any boy I ever see. Â He
knowed how to do everything.

Our hole was pretty big, but it warn't big enough to get the grindstone
through; but Jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough. Â Then Tom
marked out them things on it with the nail, and set Jim to work on them,
with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the
lean-to for a hammer, and told him to work till the rest of his candle
quit on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the grindstone under
his straw tick and sleep on it. Â Then we helped him fix his chain back
on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves. Â But Tom thought of
something, and says:

"No, sah, thanks to goodness I hain't, Mars Tom."

Tom thought a minute or two, and says:

"Keep what, Mars Tom?"

"De goodness gracious alive, Mars Tom! Â Why, if dey was a rattlesnake to
come in heah I'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall, I would, wid
my head."

"_Please_, Mars TomÂ—_doan_' talk so! Â I can't _stan_' it! Â He'd _let_
me shove his head in my moufÂ—fer a favor, hain't it? Â I lay he'd wait a
pow'ful long time 'fo' I _ast_ him. Â En mo' en dat, I doan' _want_ him
to sleep wid me."

"Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no sich glory. Â Snake take 'n bite
Jim's chin off, den _whah_ is de glory? Â No, sah, I doan' want no sich
doin's."

"But de trouble all _done_ ef de snake bite me while I's a tryin' him.
Mars Tom, I's willin' to tackle mos' anything 'at ain't onreasonable,
but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, I's
gwyne to _leave_, dat's _shore_."

"I k'n stan' _dem_, Mars Tom, but blame' 'f I couldn' get along widout
um, I tell you dat. Â I never knowed b'fo' 't was so much bother and
trouble to be a prisoner."

"Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no rats. Â Dey's de dadblamedest creturs
to 'sturb a body, en rustle roun' over 'im, en bite his feet, when he's
tryin' to sleep, I ever see. Â No, sah, gimme g'yarter-snakes, 'f I's
got to have 'm, but doan' gimme no rats; I hain' got no use f'r um,
skasely."

"Yes, _dey_ will, I reck'n, Mars Tom, but what kine er time is _Jim_
havin'? Blest if I kin see de pint. Â But I'll do it ef I got to. Â I
reck'n I better keep de animals satisfied, en not have no trouble in de
house."

Tom waited to think it over, and see if there wasn't nothing else; and
pretty soon he says:

"I doan know but maybe I could, Mars Tom; but it's tolable dark in heah,
en I ain' got no use f'r no flower, nohow, en she'd be a pow'ful sight
o' trouble."

"One er dem big cat-tail-lookin' mullen-stalks would grow in heah, Mars
Tom, I reck'n, but she wouldn't be wuth half de trouble she'd coss."

"Why, I got plenty spring water, Mars Tom."

"Why, Mars Tom, I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen-stalks twyste wid
spring water whiles another man's a _start'n_ one wid tears."

"She'll die on my han's, Mars Tom, she sholy will; kase I doan' skasely
ever cry."

So Tom was stumped. Â But he studied it over, and then said Jim would
have to worry along the best he could with an onion. Â He promised
he would go to the nigger cabins and drop one, private, in Jim's
coffee-pot, in the morning. Jim said he would "jis' 's soon have
tobacker in his coffee;" and found so much fault with it, and with the
work and bother of raising the mullen, and jews-harping the rats, and
petting and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things, on top of
all the other work he had to do on pens, and inscriptions, and journals,
and things, which made it more trouble and worry and responsibility to
be a prisoner than anything he ever undertook, that Tom most lost all
patience with him; and said he was just loadened down with more gaudier
chances than a prisoner ever had in the world to make a name for
himself, and yet he didn't know enough to appreciate them, and they was
just about wasted on him. Â So Jim he was sorry, and said he wouldn't
behave so no more, and then me and Tom shoved for bed.

We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders, and bugs, and frogs, and
caterpillars, and one thing or another; and we like to got a hornet's
nest, but we didn't. Â The family was at home. Â We didn't give it right
up, but stayed with them as long as we could; because we allowed we'd
tire them out or they'd got to tire us out, and they done it. Â Then we
got allycumpain and rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right
again, but couldn't set down convenient. Â And so we went for the snakes,
and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and put them in
a bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it was supper-time, and
a rattling good honest day's work: Â and hungry?Â—oh, no, I reckon not!
Â And there warn't a blessed snake up there when we went backÂ—we didn't
half tie the sack, and they worked out somehow, and left. Â But it didn't
matter much, because they was still on the premises somewheres. Â So
we judged we could get some of them again. Â No, there warn't no real
scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell. Â You'd see
them dripping from the rafters and places every now and then; and they
generly landed in your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most
of the time where you didn't want them. Â Well, they was handsome and
striped, and there warn't no harm in a million of them; but that never
made no difference to Aunt Sally; she despised snakes, be the breed what
they might, and she couldn't stand them no way you could fix it; and
every time one of them flopped down on her, it didn't make no difference
what she was doing, she would just lay that work down and light out. Â I
never see such a woman. Â And you could hear her whoop to Jericho. Â You
couldn't get her to take a-holt of one of them with the tongs. Â And if
she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble out and lift a
howl that you would think the house was afire. Â She disturbed the old
man so that he said he could most wish there hadn't ever been no snakes
created. Â Why, after every last snake had been gone clear out of the
house for as much as a week Aunt Sally warn't over it yet; she warn't
near over it; when she was setting thinking about something you could
touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and she would jump
right out of her stockings. Â It was very curious. Â But Tom said all
women was just so. Â He said they was made that way for some reason or
other.

Well, by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape.
Â The shirt was sent in early, in a pie, and every time a rat bit Jim he
would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh;
the pens was made, the inscriptions and so on was all carved on the
grindstone; the bed-leg was sawed in two, and we had et up the sawdust,
and it give us a most amazing stomach-ache. Â We reckoned we was all
going to die, but didn't. Â It was the most undigestible sawdust I ever
see; and Tom said the same.

But as I was saying, we'd got all the work done now, at last; and we was
all pretty much fagged out, too, but mainly Jim. Â The old man had wrote
a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come and get their
runaway nigger, but hadn't got no answer, because there warn't no such
plantation; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in the St. Louis and
New Orleans papers; and when he mentioned the St. Louis ones it give me
the cold shivers, and I see we hadn't no time to lose. So Tom said, now
for the nonnamous letters.

"But looky here, Tom, what do we want to _warn_ anybody for that
something's up? Â Let them find it out for themselvesÂ—it's their
lookout."

"Well, as for me, Tom, that's the way I'd like."

"Why, Tom, that 'll make trouble next morning; because, of course, she
prob'bly hain't got any but that one."

So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter, and I smouched the yaller wench's
frock that night, and put it on, and shoved it under the front door, the
way Tom told me to. Â It said:

Next night we stuck a picture, which Tom drawed in blood, of a skull and
crossbones on the front door; and next night another one of a coffin on
the back door. Â I never see a family in such a sweat. Â They couldn't a
been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts laying for them
behind everything and under the beds and shivering through the air. Â If
a door banged, Aunt Sally she jumped and said "ouch!" if anything fell,
she jumped and said "ouch!" if you happened to touch her, when she
warn't noticing, she done the same; she couldn't face noway and be
satisfied, because she allowed there was something behind her every
timeÂ—so she was always a-whirling around sudden, and saying "ouch," and
before she'd got two-thirds around she'd whirl back again, and say it
again; and she was afraid to go to bed, but she dasn't set up. Â So the
thing was working very well, Tom said; he said he never see a thing work
more satisfactory. He said it showed it was done right.

So he said, now for the grand bulge! Â So the very next morning at the
streak of dawn we got another letter ready, and was wondering what we
better do with it, because we heard them say at supper they was going
to have a nigger on watch at both doors all night. Â Tom he went down the
lightning-rod to spy around; and the nigger at the back door was asleep,
and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back. Â This letter
said:

WE was feeling pretty good after breakfast, and took my canoe and went
over the river a-fishing, with a lunch, and had a good time, and took a
look at the raft and found her all right, and got home late to supper,
and found them in such a sweat and worry they didn't know which end they
was standing on, and made us go right off to bed the minute we was done
supper, and wouldn't tell us what the trouble was, and never let on a
word about the new letter, but didn't need to, because we knowed as much
about it as anybody did, and as soon as we was half up stairs and her
back was turned we slid for the cellar cupboard and loaded up a good
lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up about
half-past eleven, and Tom put on Aunt Sally's dress that he stole and
was going to start with the lunch, but says:

"You don't _know_? Â Don't answer me that way. Tom, I want to know what
you been _doing_ down there."

I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, and lick me, if
she wanted to, and let me get away and tell Tom how we'd overdone this
thing, and what a thundering hornet's-nest we'd got ourselves into, so
we could stop fooling around straight off, and clear out with Jim before
these rips got out of patience and come for us.

I was up stairs in a second, and down the lightning-rod in another one,
and shinning through the dark for the lean-to. Â I couldn't hardly get my
words out, I was so anxious; but I told Tom as quick as I could we must
jump for it now, and not a minute to loseÂ—the house full of men, yonder,
with guns!

So in they come, but couldn't see us in the dark, and most trod on
us whilst we was hustling to get under the bed. Â But we got under all
right, and out through the hole, swift but softÂ—Jim first, me next,
and Tom last, which was according to Tom's orders. Â Now we was in the
lean-to, and heard trampings close by outside. Â So we crept to the door,
and Tom stopped us there and put his eye to the crack, but couldn't make
out nothing, it was so dark; and whispered and said he would listen
for the steps to get further, and when he nudged us Jim must glide out
first, and him last. Â So he set his ear to the crack and listened, and
listened, and listened, and the steps a-scraping around out there all
the time; and at last he nudged us, and we slid out, and stooped down,
not breathing, and not making the least noise, and slipped stealthy
towards the fence in Injun file, and got to it all right, and me and Jim
over it; but Tom's britches catched fast on a splinter on the top
rail, and then he hear the steps coming, so he had to pull loose, which
snapped the splinter and made a noise; and as he dropped in our tracks
and started somebody sings out:

We was all glad as we could be, but Tom was the gladdest of all because
he had a bullet in the calf of his leg.

"Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck. Â Ef it wuz _him_ dat 'uz
bein' sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, "Go on
en save me, nemmine 'bout a doctor f'r to save dis one?" Â Is dat like
Mars Tom Sawyer? Â Would he say dat? Â You _bet_ he wouldn't! Â _well_,
den, is _Jim_ gywne to say it? Â No, sahÂ—I doan' budge a step out'n dis
place 'dout a _doctor_, not if it's forty year!"

I knowed he was white inside, and I reckoned he'd say what he did sayÂ—so
it was all right now, and I told Tom I was a-going for a doctor.
Â He raised considerable row about it, but me and Jim stuck to it and
wouldn't budge; so he was for crawling out and setting the raft loose
himself; but we wouldn't let him. Â Then he give us a piece of his mind,
but it didn't do no good.

I struck an idea pretty soon. Â I says to myself, spos'n he can't fix
that leg just in three shakes of a sheep's tail, as the saying is?
spos'n it takes him three or four days? Â What are we going to do?Â—lay
around there till he lets the cat out of the bag? Â No, sir; I know what
_I'll_ do. Â I'll wait, and when he comes back if he says he's got to
go any more I'll get down there, too, if I swim; and we'll take and tie
him, and keep him, and shove out down the river; and when Tom's done
with him we'll give him what it's worth, or all we got, and then let him
get ashore.

So then I crept into a lumber-pile to get some sleep; and next time I
waked up the sun was away up over my head! Â I shot out and went for the
doctor's house, but they told me he'd gone away in the night some time
or other, and warn't back yet. Â Well, thinks I, that looks powerful bad
for Tom, and I'll dig out for the island right off. Â So away I shoved,
and turned the corner, and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas's
stomach! He says:

"Why, _Tom!_ Â Where you been all this time, you rascal?"

"People to _help_ him, Brother Marples! Â Well, I reckon you'd _think_
so if you'd a been in this house for a while back. Â Why, they've stole
everything they could lay their hands onÂ—and we a-watching all the time,
mind you. They stole that shirt right off o' the line! and as for that
sheet they made the rag ladder out of, ther' ain't no telling how
many times they _didn't_ steal that; and flour, and candles, and
candlesticks, and spoons, and the old warming-pan, and most a thousand
things that I disremember now, and my new calico dress; and me and
Silas and my Sid and Tom on the constant watch day _and_ night, as I was
a-telling you, and not a one of us could catch hide nor hair nor sight
nor sound of them; and here at the last minute, lo and behold you, they
slides right in under our noses and fools us, and not only fools _us_
but the Injun Territory robbers too, and actuly gets _away_ with that
nigger safe and sound, and that with sixteen men and twenty-two dogs
right on their very heels at that very time! Â I tell you, it just bangs
anything I ever _heard_ of. Why, _sperits_ couldn't a done better and
been no smarter. And I reckon they must a _been_ speritsÂ—because, _you_
know our dogs, and ther' ain't no better; well, them dogs never even got
on the _track_ of 'm once! Â You explain _that_ to me if you can!Â—_any_
of you!"

He come back about ten a little bit uneasy; hadn't run across Tom's
track. Aunt Sally was a good _deal_ uneasy; but Uncle Silas he said
there warn't no occasion to beÂ—boys will be boys, he said, and you'll
see this one turn up in the morning all sound and right. Â So she had
to be satisfied. Â But she said she'd set up for him a while anyway, and
keep a light burning so he could see it.

"The door ain't going to be locked, Tom, and there's the window and
the rod; but you'll be good, _won't_ you? Â And you won't go? Â For _my_
sake."

Laws knows I _wanted_ to go bad enough to see about Tom, and was all
intending to go; but after that I wouldn't a went, not for kingdoms.

But she was on my mind and Tom was on my mind, so I slept very restless.
And twice I went down the rod away in the night, and slipped around
front, and see her setting there by her candle in the window with her
eyes towards the road and the tears in them; and I wished I could do
something for her, but I couldn't, only to swear that I wouldn't never
do nothing to grieve her any more. Â And the third time I waked up at
dawn, and slid down, and she was there yet, and her candle was most out,
and her old gray head was resting on her hand, and she was asleep.

THE old man was uptown again before breakfast, but couldn't get no
track of Tom; and both of them set at the table thinking, and not saying
nothing, and looking mournful, and their coffee getting cold, and not
eating anything. And by and by the old man says:

I allowed another walk would do me good; but I couldn't stir. Â But
before she could break it open she dropped it and runÂ—for she see
something. And so did I. It was Tom Sawyer on a mattress; and that old
doctor; and Jim, in _her_ calico dress, with his hands tied behind him;
and a lot of people. Â I hid the letter behind the first thing that come
handy, and rushed. Â She flung herself at Tom, crying, and says:

And Tom he turned his head a little, and muttered something or other,
which showed he warn't in his right mind; then she flung up her hands,
and says:

I followed the men to see what they was going to do with Jim; and the
old doctor and Uncle Silas followed after Tom into the house. Â The men
was very huffy, and some of them wanted to hang Jim for an example to
all the other niggers around there, so they wouldn't be trying to run
away like Jim done, and making such a raft of trouble, and keeping a
whole family scared most to death for days and nights. Â But the others
said, don't do it, it wouldn't answer at all; he ain't our nigger, and
his owner would turn up and make us pay for him, sure. Â So that cooled
them down a little, because the people that's always the most anxious
for to hang a nigger that hain't done just right is always the very
ones that ain't the most anxious to pay for him when they've got their
satisfaction out of him.

Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better, and they said Aunt
Sally was gone to get a nap. Â So I slips to the sick-room, and if I
found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for the family that
would wash. But he was sleeping, and sleeping very peaceful, too; and
pale, not fire-faced the way he was when he come. Â So I set down and
laid for him to wake. Â In about half an hour Aunt Sally comes gliding
in, and there I was, up a stump again! Â She motioned me to be still, and
set down by me, and begun to whisper, and said we could all be joyful
now, because all the symptoms was first-rate, and he'd been sleeping
like that for ever so long, and looking better and peacefuller all the
time, and ten to one he'd wake up in his right mind.

"Why, _the_ whole thing. Â There ain't but one; how we set the runaway
nigger freeÂ—me and Tom."

"_No_, I ain't out of my _head_; I know all what I'm talking about. Â We
_did_ set him freeÂ—me and Tom. Â We laid out to do it, and we _done_ it.
Â And we done it elegant, too." Â He'd got a start, and she never checked
him up, just set and stared and stared, and let him clip along, and
I see it warn't no use for _me_ to put in. Â "Why, Aunty, it cost us a
power of workÂ—weeks of itÂ—hours and hours, every night, whilst you was
all asleep. And we had to steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt,
and your dress, and spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the
warming-pan, and the grindstone, and flour, and just no end of things,
and you can't think what work it was to make the saws, and pens, and
inscriptions, and one thing or another, and you can't think _half_ the
fun it was. Â And we had to make up the pictures of coffins and things,
and nonnamous letters from the robbers, and get up and down the
lightning-rod, and dig the hole into the cabin, and made the rope ladder
and send it in cooked up in a pie, and send in spoons and things to work
with in your apron pocketÂ—"

"Â—and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on, for company for
Jim; and then you kept Tom here so long with the butter in his hat that
you come near spiling the whole business, because the men come before
we was out of the cabin, and we had to rush, and they heard us and let
drive at us, and I got my share, and we dodged out of the path and let
them go by, and when the dogs come they warn't interested in us, but
went for the most noise, and we got our canoe, and made for the
raft, and was all safe, and Jim was a free man, and we done it all by
ourselves, and _wasn't_ it bully, Aunty!"

But Tom, he _was_ so proud and joyful, he just _couldn't_ hold in,
and his tongue just _went_ itÂ—she a-chipping in, and spitting fire all
along, and both of them going it at once, like a cat convention; and she
says:

"Meddling with _who_?" Â Tom says, dropping his smile and looking
surprised.

Tom looks at me very grave, and says:

"Tom, didn't you just tell me he was all right? Â Hasn't he got away?"

Tom rose square up in bed, with his eye hot, and his nostrils opening
and shutting like gills, and sings out to me:

"I mean every word I _say_, Aunt Sally, and if somebody don't go, _I'll_
go. I've knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there. Â Old Miss
Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed she ever was going to
sell him down the river, and _said_ so; and she set him free in her
will."

Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off of her, and
cried over her, and I found a good enough place for me under the bed,
for it was getting pretty sultry for us, seemed to me. Â And I peeped
out, and in a little while Tom's Aunt Polly shook herself loose and
stood there looking across at Tom over her spectaclesÂ—kind of grinding
him into the earth, you know. Â And then she says:

"Yes, you _better_ turn y'r head awayÂ—I would if I was you, Tom."

"Oh, deary me!" says Aunt Sally; "_Is_ he changed so? Â Why, that ain't
_Tom_, it's Sid; Tom'sÂ—Tom'sÂ—why, where is Tom? Â He was here a minute
ago."

"You mean where's Huck _Finn_Â—that's what you mean! Â I reckon I hain't
raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years not to know him when I
_see_ him. Â That _would_ be a pretty howdy-do. Come out from under that
bed, Huck Finn."

Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest-looking persons I ever
seeÂ—except one, and that was Uncle Silas, when he come in and they told
it all to him. Â It kind of made him drunk, as you may say, and he didn't
know nothing at all the rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meeting
sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation, because the
oldest man in the world couldn't a understood it. Â So Tom's Aunt Polly,
she told all about who I was, and what; and I had to up and tell how
I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom
SawyerÂ—she chipped in and says, "Oh, go on and call me Aunt Sally, I'm
used to it now, and 'tain't no need to change"Â—that when Aunt Sally took
me for Tom Sawyer I had to stand itÂ—there warn't no other way, and
I knowed he wouldn't mind, because it would be nuts for him, being
a mystery, and he'd make an adventure out of it, and be perfectly
satisfied. Â And so it turned out, and he let on to be Sid, and made
things as soft as he could for me.

And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting
Jim free in her will; and so, sure enough, Tom Sawyer had gone and took
all that trouble and bother to set a free nigger free! and I couldn't
ever understand before, until that minute and that talk, how he _could_
help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up.

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom and
_Sid_ had come all right and safe, she says to herself:

"You, Tom!"

THE first time I catched Tom private I asked him what was his idea, time
of the evasion?Â—what it was he'd planned to do if the evasion worked all
right and he managed to set a nigger free that was already free before?
And he said, what he had planned in his head from the start, if we got
Jim out all safe, was for us to run him down the river on the raft, and
have adventures plumb to the mouth of the river, and then tell him about
his being free, and take him back up home on a steamboat, in style,
and pay him for his lost time, and write word ahead and get out all
the niggers around, and have them waltz him into town with a torchlight
procession and a brass-band, and then he would be a hero, and so would
we. Â But I reckoned it was about as well the way it was.

We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly and Uncle
Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped the doctor nurse Tom,
they made a heap of fuss over him, and fixed him up prime, and give him
all he wanted to eat, and a good time, and nothing to do. Â And we had
him up to the sick-room, and had a high talk; and Tom give Jim forty
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so good,
and Jim was pleased most to death, and busted out, and says:

And then Tom he talked along and talked along, and says, le's all three
slide out of here one of these nights and get an outfit, and go for
howling adventures amongst the Injuns, over in the Territory, for a
couple of weeks or two; and I says, all right, that suits me, but I
ain't got no money for to buy the outfit, and I reckon I couldn't get
none from home, because it's likely pap's been back before now, and got
it all away from Judge Thatcher and drunk it up.

"No, he hain't," Tom says; "it's all there yetÂ—six thousand dollars
and more; and your pap hain't ever been back since. Â Hadn't when I come
away, anyhow."

Tom's most well now, and got his bullet around his neck on a watch-guard
for a watch, and is always seeing what time it is, and so there ain't
nothing more to write about, and I am rotten glad of it, because if I'd
a knowed what a trouble it was to make a book I wouldn't a tackled it,
and ain't a-going to no more. Â But I reckon I got to light out for the
Territory ahead of the rest, because Aunt Sally she's going to adopt me
and sivilize me, and I can't stand it. Â I been there before.

