In order to catch the Liverpool steamer at Douglas it was necessary to
leave Port Erin at half-past six in the morning. The freshness of the
morning, and the smiles of the Alderman and his wife as they waved
God-speed from the doorstep, filled Anna with a serene content which
she certainly had not felt during the wakeful night. She forgot, then,
the hours passed with her conscience in realising how serious and
solemn a thing was this engagement, made in an instant on the previous
evening. All that remained in her mind, as she and Henry walked
quickly down the road, was the tonic sensation of high resolves to be a
worthy wife. The duties, rather than the joys, of her condition, had
lain nearest her heart until that moment of setting out, giving her an
anxious and almost worried mien which at breakfast neither Henry nor
the Suttons could quite understand. But now the idea of duty ceased
for a time to be paramount, and she loosed herself to the pleasures of
the day in store. The harbour was full of low wandering mists, through
which the brown sails of the fishing-smacks played at hide-and-seek.
High above them the round forms of immense clouds were still carrying
the colours of sunrise. The gentle salt wind on the cheek was like the
touch of a life-giver. It was impossible, on such a morning, not to
exult in life, not to laugh childishly from irrational glee, not to
dismiss the memory of grief and the apprehension of grief as morbid
hallucinations. Mynor's face expressed the double happiness of present
and anticipated pleasure. He had once again succeeded, he who had
never failed; and the voyage back to England was for him a triumphal
progress. Anna responded eagerly to his mood. The day was an ecstasy,
a bright expanse unstained. To Anna in particular it was a unique day,
marking the apogee of her existence. In the years that followed she
could always return to it and say to herself: "That day I was happy,
foolishly, ignorantly, but utterly. And all that I have since learnt
cannot alter it--I was happy."
