She went to bed without opening her mouth. Irresolute, shamed, and
despairing, she tried to pray for guidance, but she could bring no
sincerity of appeal into this prayer; it seemed an empty form. Where,
indeed, was her religion? She was obliged to acknowledge that the
fervour of her aspirations had been steadily cooling for weeks. She
was not a whit more a true Christian now than she had been before the
Revival; it appeared that she was incapable of real religion, possibly
one of those souls foreordained to damnation. This admission added to
the general sense of futility, and increased her misery. She lay awake
for hours, confronting her deliberate promise to Willie Price.
_Something shall be done_. _Rely on me_. He was relying on her, then.
But on whom could she rely? To whom could she turn? It is significant
that the idea of confiding in Henry Mynors did not present itself for a
single moment as practical. Mynors had been kind to Willie in his
trouble, but Anna almost resented this kindness on account of the
condescending superiority which she thought she detected therein. It
was as though she had overheard Mynors saying to himself: "Here is this
poor, crushed worm. It is my duty as a Christian to pity and succour
him. I will do so. I am a righteous man." The thought of anyone
stooping to Willie was hateful to her. She felt equal with him, as a
mother feels equal with her child when it cries and she soothes it.
And she felt, in another way, that he was equal with her, as she
thought of his sturdy and simple confession, and of the loyal love in
his voice when he spoke of his father. She liked him for hurting her
hand, and for refusing to snatch at the slender chance of her father's
clemency. She could never reveal Willie's sin, if it was a sin, to
Henry Mynors--that symbol of correctness and of success. She had
fraternised with sinners, like Christ; and, with amazing injustice, she
was capable of deeming Mynors a Pharisee because she could not find
fault with him, because he lived and loved so impeccably and so
triumphantly. There was only one person from whom she could have asked
advice and help, and that wise and consoling heart was far away in the
Isle of Man.
