When she had climbed Duck Bank she found to her surprise that the doors
of the chapel were fast closed, though it was ten minutes past seven.
Was there to be no prayer-meeting? A momentary sensation of relief
flashed through her, and then she saw that the gate of the school-yard
was open. She should have known that early morning prayers were never
offered up in the chapel, but in the lecture-hall. She crossed the
quadrangle with beating heart, feeling now that she had embarked on a
frightful enterprise. The door of the lecture-hall was ajar; she
pushed it and went in. At the other end of the hall a meagre handful
of worshippers were collected, and on the raised platform stood Mr.
Banks, vapid, perfunctory and fatigued. He gave out a verse, and
pitched the tune--too high, but the singers with a heroic effect
accomplished the verse without breaking down. The singing was thin and
feeble, and the eagerness of one or two voices seemed strained, as
though with a determination to make the best of things. Mynors was not
present, and Anna did not know whether to be sorry or glad at this.
She recognised that save herself all present were old believers, tried
warriors of the Lord. There was only one other woman, Miss Sarah
Vodrey, an aged spinster who kept house for Titus Price and his son,
and found her sole diversion in the variety of her religious
experiences. Before the hymn was finished a young man joined the
assembly; it was the youth who had sat near Anna on the previous night,
an ecstatic and naïve bliss shone from his face. In his prayer the
minister drew the attention of the Deity to the fact that although a
score or more of souls had been ingathered at the first service, the
Methodists of Bursley were by no means satisfied. They wanted more;
they wanted the whole of Bursley; and they would be content with no
less. He begged that their earnest work might not be shamed before the
world by a partial success. In conclusion he sought the blessing of
God on the revivalist and asked that this tireless enthusiast might be
led to husband his strength: at which there was a fervent Amen.
