They climbed a flight of steps to the printing-shop, where, by means of
copper-plates, printing-presses, mineral colours, and transfer-papers,
most of the decoration was done. The room was filled by a little crowd
of people--oldish men, women and girls, divided into printers, cutters,
transferors and apprentices. Each interminably repeated some trifling
process, and every article passed through a succession of hands until
at length it was washed in a tank and rose dripping therefrom with its
ornament of flowers and scrolls fully revealed. The room smelt of oil
and flannel and humanity; the atmosphere was more languid, more like
that of a family party, than in the pressers' shop: the old women
looked stern and shrewish, the pretty young women pert and defiant, the
younger girls meek. The few men seemed out of place. By what trick
had they crept into the very centre of that mass of femineity? It
seemed wrong, scandalous that they should remain. Contiguous with the
printing-shop was the painting-shop, in which the labours of the former
were taken to a finish by the brush of the paintress, who filled in
outlines with flat colour, and thus converted mechanical printing into
handiwork. The paintresses form the _noblesse_ of the banks. Their
task is a light one, demanding deftness first of all; they have
delicate fingers, and enjoy a general reputation for beauty: the wages
they earn may be estimated from their finery on Sundays. They come to
business in cloth jackets, carry dinner in little satchels; in the shop
they wear white aprons, and look startlingly neat and tidy. Across the
benches over which they bend their coquettish heads gossip flies and
returns like a shuttle; they are the source of a thousand intrigues,
and one or other of them is continually getting married or omitting to
get married. On the bank they constitute 'the sex." An infinitesimal
proportion of them, from among the branch known as ground-layers, die
of lead-poisoning--a fact which adds pathos to their frivolous charm.
In a subsidiary room off the painting-shop a single girl was seated at
a revolving table actuated by a treadle. She was doing the
'band-and-line' on the rims of saucers. Mynors and Anna watched her as
with her left hand she flicked saucer after saucer into the exact
centre of the table, moved the treadle, and, holding a brush firmly
against the rim of the piece, produced with infallible exactitude the
band and the line. She was a brunette, about twenty-eight: she had a
calm, vacuously contemplative face; but God alone knew whether she
thought. Her work represented the summit of monotony; the regularity
of it hypnotised the observer, and Mynors himself was impressed by this
stupendous phenomenon of absolute sameness, involuntarily assuming
towards it the attitude of a showman.
