Anna could not but be impressed by this unaffected joy of her friends
in the engagement. Her spirits rose, and once more she saw visions of
future happiness. At tea, Alderman Sutton added his felicitations to
the rest, with that flattering air of intimate sympathy and
comprehension which some middle-aged men can adopt towards young girls.
The tea, made specially magnificent in honour of the betrothal, was
such a meal as could only have been compassed in Staffordshire or
Yorkshire--a high tea of the last richness and excellence, exquisitely
gracious to the palate, but ruthless in its demands on the stomach. At
one end of the table, which glittered with silver, glass, and Longshaw
china, was a fowl which had been boiled for four hours; at the other, a
hot pork-pie, islanded in liquor, which might have satisfied a
regiment. Between these two dishes were all the delicacies which
differentiate high tea from tea, and on the quality of which the
success of the meal really depends; hot pikelets, hot crumpets, hot
toast, sardines with tomatoes, raisin-bread, current-bread, seed-cake,
lettuce, home-made marmalade and home-made jams. The repast occupied
over an hour, and even then not a quarter of the food was consumed.
Surrounded by all that good fare and good-will, with the Alderman on
her left, Henry on her right, and a bright fire in front of her, Anna
quickly caught the gaiety of the others. She forgot everything but the
gladness of reunion, the joy of the moment, the luxurious comfort of
the house. Conversation was busy with the doings of the Suttons at
Port Erin after Anna and Henry had left. A listener would have caught
fragments like this:--"You know such-and-such a point.... No, not
there, over the hill. Well, we hired a carriage and drove.... The
weather was simply.... Tom Kelly said he'd never.... And that little
guard on the railway came all the way down to the steamer.... Did you
see anything in the "Signal" about the actress being drowned? Oh! It
was awfully sad. We saw the corpse just after.... Beatrice, will you
hush?"
