Anna had meant to reach chapel before the commencement of the meeting,
but the interview with her father threw her late. As she entered the
porch an officer told her that the body of the chapel was quite full
and that she should go into the gallery, where a few seats were left
near the choir. She obeyed: pew-holders had no rights at that service.
The scene in the auditorium astonished her, effectually putting an end
to the worldly preoccupation caused by her father's news. The historic
chapel was crowded almost in every part, and the
congregation--impressed, excited, eager--sang the opening hymn with
unprecedented vigour and sincerity; above the rest could be heard the
trained voices of a large choir, and even the choir, usually
perfunctory, seemed to share the general fervour. In the vast mahogany
pulpit the Reverend Reginald Banks, the superintendent minister, a
stout pale-faced man with pendent cheeks and cold grey eyes, stood
impassively regarding the assemblage, and by his side was the
revivalist, a manikin in comparison with his colleague; on the broad
balustrade of the pulpit lay the cornet. The fiery and inquisitive
eyes of the revivalist probed into the furthest corners of the chapel;
apparently no detail of any single face or of the florid decoration
escaped him, and as Anna crept into a small empty pew next to the east
wall she felt that she too had been separately observed. Mr. Banks
gave out the last verse of the hymn, and simultaneously with the
leading chord from the organ the revivalist seized his cornet and
joined the melody. Massive yet exultant, the tones rose clear over the
mighty volume of vocal sound, an incitement to victorious effort. The
effect was instant: an ecstatic tremor seemed to pass through the
congregation, like wind through ripe corn, and at the close of the hymn
it was not until the revivalist had put down his cornet that the people
resumed their seats. Amid the _frou-frou_ of dresses and subdued
clearing of throats, Mr. Banks retired softly to the back of the
pulpit, and the revivalist, mounting a stool, suddenly dominated the
congregation. His glance swept masterfully across the chapel and round
the gallery. He raised one hand with the stilling action of a
mesmerist, and the people, either kneeling or inclined against the
front of the pews, hid their faces from those eyes. It was as though
the man had in a moment measured their iniquities, and had courageously
resolved to intercede for them with God, but was not very sanguine as
to the result. Everyone except the organist, who was searching his
tune-book for the next tune, seemed to feel humbled, bitterly ashamed,
as it were caught in the act of sin. There was a solemn and terrible
pause.
