About this time Anna was not seeing very much of Henry Mynors. At
twenty a man is rash in love, and again, perhaps, at fifty; a man of
middle-age enamoured of a young girl is capable of sublime follies.
But the man of thirty who loves for the first time is usually the
embodiment of cautious discretion. He does not fall in love with a
violent descent, but rather lets himself gently down, continually
testing the rope. His social value, especially if he have achieved
worldly success, is at its highest, and, without conceit, he is aware
of it. He has lost many illusions concerning women; he has seen more
than one friend wrecked in the sea of foolish marriage; he knows the
joys of a bachelor's freedom, without having wearied of them; he
perceives risks where the youth perceives only ecstasy, and the oldster
only a blissful release from solitude. Instead of searching, he is
sought for; accordingly he is selfish and exacting. All these things,
combine to tranquillize passion at thirty. Mynors was in love with
Anna, and his love had its ardent moments; but in the main it was a
temperate affection, an affection that walked circumspectly, with its
eyes open, careful of its dignity, too proud to seem in a hurry; if, by
impulse, it chanced now and then to leap forward, the involuntary
movement was mastered and checked. Mynors called at Manor Terrace once
a week, never on the same day of the week, nor without discussing
business with the miser. Occasionally he accompanied Anna from school
or chapel. Such methods were precisely to Anna's taste. Like him, she
loved prudence and decorum, preferring to make haste slowly. Since the
Revival, they had only once talked together intimately; on that sole
occasion Henry had suggested to her that she might care to join Mrs.
Sutton's class, which met on Monday nights; she accepted the hint with
pleasure, and found a well of spiritual inspiration in Mrs. Sutton's
modest and simple yet fervent homilies. Mynors was not guilty of
blowing both hot and cold. She was sure of him. She waited calmly for
events, existing, as her habit was, in the future.
