Anna began to receive her July interest and dividends. During a
fortnight remittances, varying from a few pounds to a few hundred of
pounds, arrived by post almost daily. They were all addressed to her,
since the securities now stood in her own name; and upon her, under the
miser's superintendence, fell the new task of entering them in a book
and paying them into the Bank. This mysterious begetting of money by
money--a strange process continually going forward for her benefit, in
various parts of the world, far and near, by means of activities of
which she was completely ignorant and would always be completely
ignorant--bewildered her and gave her a feeling of its unreality. The
elaborate mechanism by which capital yields interest without suffering
diminution from its original bulk is one of the commonest phenomena of
modern life, and one of the least understood. Many capitalists never
grasp it, nor experience the slightest curiosity about it until the
mechanism through some defect ceases to revolve. Tellwright was of
these; for him the interval between the outlay of capital and the
receipt of interest was nothing but an efflux of time: he planted
capital as a gardener plants rhubarb, tolerably certain of a particular
result, but not dwelling even in thought on that which is hidden. The
productivity of capital was to him the greatest achievement of social
progress--indeed, the social organism justified its existence by that
achievement; nothing could be more equitable than this productivity,
nothing more natural. He would as soon have inquired into it as Agnes
would have inquired into the ticking of the grandfather's clock. But
to Anna, who had some imagination, and whose imagination had been
stirred by recent events, the arrival of moneys out of space, unearned,
unasked, was a disturbing experience, affecting her as a conjuring
trick affects a child, whose sensations hesitate between pleasure and
apprehension. Practically, Anna could not believe that she was rich;
and in fact she was not rich--she was merely a fixed point through
which moneys that she was unable to arrest passed with the rapidity of
trains. If money is a token, Anna was denied the satisfaction of
fingering even the token: drafts and cheques were all that she touched
(touched only to abandon)--the doubly tantalising and insubstantial
tokens of a token. She wanted to test the actuality of this apparent
dream by handling coin and causing it to vanish over counters and into
the palms of the necessitous. And moreover, quite apart from this
curiosity, she really needed money for pressing requirements of Agnes
and herself. They had yet had no new summer clothes, and Whitsuntide,
the time prescribed by custom for the refurnishing of wardrobes, was
long since past. The intercourse with Henry Mynors, the visit to the
Suttons, had revealed to her more plainly than ever the intolerable
shortcomings of her wardrobe, and similar imperfections. She was more
painfully awake to these, and yet, by an unhappy paradox, she was even
less in a position to remedy them, than in previous years. For now,
she possessed her own fortune; to ask her father's bounty was
therefore, she divined, a sure way of inviting a rebuff. But, even if
she had dared, she might not use the income that was privately hers,
for was not every penny of it already allocated to the partnership with
Mynors! So it happened that she never once mentioned the matter to her
father; she lacked the courage, since by whatever avenue she approached
it circumstances would add an illogical and adventitious force to the
brutal snubs which he invariably dealt out when petitioned for money.
To demand his money, having fifty thousand of her own! To spend her
own in the face of that agreement with Mynors! She could too easily
guess his bitter and humiliating retorts to either proposition, and she
kept silence, comforting herself with timid visions of a far distant
future. The balance at the bank crept up to sixteen hundred pounds.
The deed of partnership was drawn; her father pored over the blue
draft, and several times Mynors called and the two men discussed it
together. Then one morning her father summoned her into the front
parlour, and handed to her a piece of parchment on which she dimly
deciphered her own name coupled with that of Henry Mynors, in large
letters.
