The school-treat was held in a twelve-acre field near Sneyd, the seat
of a marquis, and a Saturday afternoon resort very popular in the Five
Towns. The children were formed at noon on Duck Bank into a
procession, which marched to the railway station to the singing of
"Shall we gather at the river?" Thence a special train carried them,
in seething compartments, excited and strident, to Sneyd, where there
had been two sharp showers in the morning, the procession was reformed
along a country road, and the vacillating sky threatened more rain; but
because the sun had shone dazzlingly at eleven o'clock all the women
and girls, too easily tempted by the glory of the moment, blossomed
forth in pale blouses and parasols. The chattering crowd, bright and
defenceless as flowers, made at Sneyd a picture at once gay and
pathetic. It had rained there at half-past twelve; the roads were wet;
and among the two hundred and fifty children and thirty teachers there
were less than a score umbrellas. The excursion was theoretically in
charge of Titus Price, the Senior Superintendent, but this dignitary
had failed to arrive on Duck Bank, and Mynors had taken his place. In
the train Anna heard that some one had seen Mr. Price, wearing a large
grey wideawake, leap into the guard's van at the very instant of
departure. He had not been at school on the previous Sunday, and Anna
was somewhat perturbed at the prospect of meeting the man who had
defined her letter to him as unique in the whole of his business
career. She caught a glimpse of the grey wideawake on the platform at
Sneyd, and steered her own scholars so as to avoid its vicinity. But
on the march to the field Titus reviewed the procession, and she was
obliged to meet his eyes and return his salutation. The look of the
man was a shock to her. He seemed thinner, nervous, restless,
preoccupied, and terribly careworn; except the new brilliant hat, all
his summer clothes were soiled and shabby. It was as though he had
forced himself, out of regard for appearances, to attend the fête, but
had left his thoughts in Edward Street. His uneasy and hollow
cheerfulness was painful to watch. Anna realised the intensity of the
crisis through which Mr. Price was passing. She perceived in a single
glance, more clearly than she could have done after a hundred
interviews with the young and unresponsible William--however
distressing these might be--that Titus must for weeks have been engaged
in a truly frightful struggle. His face was a proof of the tragic
sincerity of William's appeals to herself and to her father. That
Price should have contrived to pay seventy pounds of rent in a little
more than a month seemed to her, imperfectly acquainted alike with
Ephraim's ruthless compulsions and with the financial jugglery often
practised by hard-pressed debtors, to be an almost miraculous effort
after honesty. Her conscience smote her for conniving at which she now
saw to be a persecution. She felt as sorry for Titus as she had felt
for his son. The obese man, with his reputation in rags about him, was
acutely wistful in her eyes, as a child might have been.
