She followed him without a word through the archway. To the right was
an open door into the packing-house, where a man surrounded by straw
was packing basins in a crate: with swift, precise movements, twisting
straw between basin and basin, he forced piles of ware into a space
inconceivably small. Mr. Price lingered to watch him for a few
seconds, and passed on. They were in the yard, a small quadrangle
paved with black, greasy mud. In one corner a load of coal had been
cast; in another lay a heap of broken saggars. Decrepit doorways led
to the various 'shops' on the ground floor; those on the upper floor
were reached by narrow wooden stairs, which seemed to cling insecurely
to the exterior walls. Up one of these stairways Mr. Price climbed
with heavy, elephantine movements: Anna prudently waited till he had
reached the top before beginning to ascend. He pushed open a flimsy
door, and with a nod bade her enter. The office was a long narrow
room, the dirtiest that Anna had ever seen. If such was the condition
of the master's quarters, she thought, what must the workshops be like?
The ceiling, which bulged downwards, was as black as the floor, which
sank away in the middle till it was hollow like a saucer. The
revolution of an engine somewhere below shook everything with a
periodic muffled thud. A greyish light came through one small window.
By the window was a large double desk, with chairs facing each other.
One of these chairs was occupied by Willie Price. The youth did not
observe at first that another person had come in with his father. He
was casting up figures in an account book, and murmuring numbers to
himself. He wore an office coat, short at the wrists and torn at the
elbows, and a battered felt hat was thrust far back over his head so
that the brim rested on his dirty collar. He turned round at length,
and, on seeing Anna, blushed brilliant crimson, and rose, scraping the
legs of his chair horribly across the floor. Tall, thin, and ungainly
in every motion, he had the look of a ninny: it was the fact that at
school all the boys by a common instinct had combined to tease him, and
that on the works the young paintresses continually made private sport
of him. Anna, however, had not the least impulse to mock him in her
thoughts. For her there was nothing in his blue eyes but simplicity
and good intentions. Beside him she felt old, sagacious, crafty: it
seemed to her that some one ought to shield that transparent and
confiding soul from his father and the intriguing world.
