During all this period he was what is termed 'a good Wesleyan,"
preaching and teaching, and spending himself in the various activities
of Hanbridge chapel. For many years he had been circuit treasurer.
Among Anna's earliest memories was a picture of her father arriving
late for supper one Sunday night in autumn after an anniversary
service, and pouring out on the white tablecloth the contents of
numerous chamois-leather money-bags. She recalled the surprising
dexterity with which he counted the coins, the peculiar smell of the
bags, and her mother's bland exclamation, "Eh, Ephraim!" Tellwright
belonged by birth to the Old Guard of Methodism; there was in his
family a tradition of holy valour for the pure doctrine: his father, a
Bursley man, had fought in the fight which preceded the famous
Primitive Methodist Secession of 1808 at Bursley, and had also borne a
notable part in the Warren affrays of '28, and the disastrous trouble
of the Fly-Sheets in '49, when Methodism lost a hundred thousand
members. As for Ephraim, he expounded the mystery of the Atonement in
village conventicles and grew garrulous with God at prayer-meetings in
the big Bethesda chapel; but he did these things as routine, without
skill and without enthusiasm, because they gave him an unassailable
position within the central group of the society. He was not, in fact,
much smitten with either the doctrinal or the spiritual side of
Methodism. His chief interest lay in those fiscal schemes of
organisation without whose aid no religious propaganda can possibly
succeed. It was in the finance of salvation that he rose supreme--the
interminable alternation of debt-raising and new liability which
provides a lasting excitement for Nonconformists. In the negotiation
of mortgages, the artful arrangement of appeals, the planning of
anniversaries and of mighty revivals, he was an undisputed leader. To
him the circuit was a 'going concern," and he kept it in motion,
serving the Lord in committee and over statements of account. The
minister by his pleading might bring sinners to the penitent form, but
it was Ephraim Tellwright who reduced the cost per head of souls saved,
and so widened the frontiers of the Kingdom of Heaven.
