When, in a moment far too short, they reached Tellwright's house,
Mynors, obeying a mutual wish to which neither had given expression,
followed Anna up the side entry, and so into the yard, where they
lingered for a few seconds. Old Tellwright could be seen at the
extremity of the long narrow garden--a garden which consisted chiefly
of a grass-plot sown with clothes-props and a narrow bordering of
flower beds without flowers. Agnes was invisible. The kitchen-door
stood ajar, and as this was the sole means of ingress from the yard
Anna, humming an air, pushed it open and entered, Mynors in her wake.
They stood on the threshold, happy, hesitating, confused, and looked at
the kitchen as at something which they had not seen before. Anna's
kitchen was the only satisfactory apartment in the house. Its
furniture included a dresser of the simple and dignified kind which is
now assiduously collected by amateurs of old oak. It had four long
narrow shelves holding plates and saucers; the cups were hung in a row
on small brass hooks screwed into the fronts of the shelves. Below the
shelves were three drawers in a line, with brass handles, and below the
drawers was a large recess which held stone jars, a copper
preserving-saucepan, and other receptacles. Seventy years of
continuous polishing by a dynasty of priestesses of cleanliness had
given to this dresser a rich ripe tone which the cleverest
trade-trickster could not have imitated. In it was reflected the
conscientious labour of generations. It had a soft and assuaged
appearance, as though it had never been new and could never have been
new. All its corners and edges had long lost the asperities of
manufacture, and its smooth surfaces were marked by slight hollows
similar in spirit to those worn by the naked feet of pilgrims into the
marble steps of a shrine. The flat portion over the drawers was
scarred with hundreds of scratches, and yet even all these seemed to be
incredibly ancient, and in some distant past to have partaken of the
mellowness of the whole. The dark woodwork formed an admirable
background for the crockery on the shelves, and a few of the old
plates, hand-painted according to some vanished secret in pigments
which time could only improve, had the look of relationship by birth to
the dresser. There must still be thousands of exactly similar dressers
in the kitchens of the people, but they are gradually being transferred
to the dining rooms of curiosity-hunters. To Anna this piece of
furniture, which would have made the most taciturn collector vocal with
joy, was merely 'the dresser." She had always lamented that it
contained no cupboard. In front of the fireless range was an old steel
kitchen fender with heavy fire-irons. It had in the middle of its flat
top a circular lodgment for saucepans, but on this polished disc no
saucepan was ever placed. The fender was perhaps as old as the
dresser, and the profound depths of its polish served to mitigate
somewhat the newness of the patent coal-economising range which
Tellwright had had put in when he took the house. On the high
mantelpiece were four tall brass candlesticks which, like the dresser,
were silently awaiting their apotheosis at the hands of some collector.
Beside these were two or three common mustard tins, polished to
counterfeit silver, containing spices; also an abandoned coffee-mill
and two flat-irons. A grandfather's clock of oak to match the dresser
stood to the left of the fireplace; it had a very large white dial with
a grinning face in the centre. Though it would only run for
twenty-four hours, its leisured movement seemed to have the certainty
of a natural law, especially to Agnes, for Mr. Tellwright never forgot
to wind it before going to bed. Under the window was a plain deal
table, with white top and stained legs. Two Windsor chairs completed
the catalogue of furniture. The glistening floor was of red and black
tiles, and in front of the fender lay a list hearthrug made by
attaching innumerable bits of black cloth to a canvas base. On the
painted walls were several grocers' almanacs, depicting sailors in the
arms of lovers, children crossing brooks, or monks swelling themselves
with Gargantuan repasts. Everything in this kitchen was absolutely
bright and spotless, as clean as a cat in pattens, except the ceiling,
darkened by fumes of gas. Everything was in perfect order, and had the
humanised air of use and occupation which nothing but use and
occupation can impart to senseless objects. It was a kitchen where, in
the housewife's phrase, you might eat off the floor, and to any Bursley
matron it would have constituted the highest possible certificate of
Anna's character, not only as housewife but as elder sister--for in her
absence Agnes had washed the tea-things and put them away.
