It was decided that they should go fishing in the "Fay." There was a
light southerly breeze, a cloudy sky, and smooth water. Under charge
of young Tom Kelly, a sheepish lad of sixteen, with his father's smile,
they all got into an inconceivably small dinghy, loading it down till
it was almost awash. Old Tom himself helped Anna to embark, told her
where to tread, and forced her gently into a seat at the stern. No one
else seemed to be disturbed, but Anna was in a state of desperate fear.
She had never committed herself to a boat before, and the little waves
spat up against the sides in a most alarming way as young Tom jerked
the dinghy along with the short sculls. She went white, and clung in
silence fiercely to the gunwale. In a few moments they were tied up to
the "Fay," which seemed very big and safe in comparison with the
dinghy. They clambered on board, and in the deep well of the two-ton
yacht Anna contrived to collect her wits. She was reassured by the
painted legend in the well, "Licensed to carry eleven." Young Tom and
Henry busied themselves with ropes, and suddenly a huge white sail
began to ascend the mast; it flapped like thunder in the gentle breeze.
Tom pulled up the anchor, curling the chain round and round on the
forward deck, and then Anna noticed that, although the wind was
scarcely perceptible, they were gliding quickly past the embankment.
Henry was at the tiller. The next minute Tom had set the jib, and by
this time the "Fay' was approaching the breakwater at a great pace.
There was no rolling or pitching, but simply a smooth, swift
progression over the calm surface. Anna thought it the ideal of
locomotion. As soon as they were beyond the breakwater and the sails
caught the breeze from the Sound, the "Fay' lay over as if shot, and a
little column of green water flung itself on the lee coaming of the
well. Anna screamed as she saw the water and felt the angle of the
floor suddenly change, but when everyone laughed, she laughed too.
Henry, noticing the whiteness of her knuckles as she gripped the
coaming, explained the disconcerting phenomena. Anna tried to be at
ease, but she was not. She could not for a long time dismiss the
suspicion that all these people were foolishly blind to a peril which
she alone had the sagacity to perceive.
