What surprised Anna most in the affair was that Henry Mynors should
have been able to tempt her father into a speculation. Ephraim
Tellwright the investor was usually as shy as a well-fed trout, and
this capture of him by a youngster only two years established in
business might fairly be regarded as a prodigious feat. It was indeed
the highest distinction of Mynors' commercial career. Henry was so
prominently active in the Wesleyan Society that the members of that
society, especially the women, were apt to ignore the other side of his
individuality. They knew him supreme as a religious worker; they did
not realise the likelihood of his becoming supreme in the staple
manufacture. Left an orphan at seventeen, Mynors belonged to a family
now otherwise extinct in the Five Towns--one of those families which by
virtue of numbers, variety, and personal force seem to permeate a whole
district, to be a calculable item of it, an essential part of its
identity. The elders of the Mynors blood had once occupied the red
house opposite Tellwright's, now used as a school, and had there reared
many children: the school building was still known as "Mynors's' by
old-fashioned people. Then the parents died in middle age: one
daughter married in the North, another in the South; a third went to
China as a missionary and died of fever; the eldest son died; the
second had vanished into Canada and was reported a scapegrace; the
third was a sea-captain. Henry (the youngest) alone was left, and of
all the family Henry was the only one to be connected with the
earthenware trade. There was no inherited money, and during ten years
he had worked for a large firm in Turnhill, as clerk, as traveller, and
last as manager, living always quietly in lodgings. In the fullness of
time he gave notice to leave, was offered a partnership, and refused
it. Taking a newly erected manufactory in Bursley near the canal, he
started in business for himself, and it became known that, at the age
of twenty-eight, he had saved fifteen hundred pounds. Equally expert
in the labyrinths of manufacture and in the niceties of the markets (he
was reckoned a peerless traveller), Mynors inevitably flourished. His
order-books were filled and flowing over at remunerative prices, and
insufficiency of capital was the sole peril to which he was exposed.
By the raising of a finger he could have had a dozen working and
moneyed partners, but he had no desire for a working partner. What he
wanted was a capitalist who had confidence in him, Mynors. In Ephraim
Tellwright he found the man. Whether it was by instinct, good luck, or
skilful diplomacy that Mynors secured this invaluable prize no one
could positively say, and perhaps even he himself could not have
catalogued all the obscure motives that had guided him to the shrewd
miser of Manor Terrace.
