The meeting was held in a large class-room, furnished with wooden
seats, a chair and a small table. On the grey distempered walls hung a
few Biblical cartoons depicting scenes in the life of Joseph and his
brethren--but without reference to Potiphar's wife. From the
whitewashed ceiling depended a T-shaped gas-fitting, one burner of
which showed a glimmer, though the sun had not yet set. The evening
was oppressively warm, and through the wide-open window came the faint
effluvium of populous cottages and the distant but raucous cries of
children at play. When Anna entered a group of young men were talking
eagerly round the table; among these was Willie Price, who greeted her.
No others had come: she sat down in a corner by the door, invisible
except from within the room. Gradually the place began to fill. Then
at last Mynors entered: Anna recognised his authoritative step before
she saw him. He walked quickly to the chair in front of the table,
and, including all in a friendly and generous smile, said that in the
absence of Mr. Titus Price it fell to him to take the chair; he was
glad that so many had made a point of being present. Everyone sat
down. He gave out a hymn, and led the singing himself, attacking the
first note with an assurance born of practice. Then he prayed, and as
he prayed Anna gazed at him intently. He was standing up, the ends of
his fingers pressed against the top of the table. Very carefully
dressed as usual, he wore a brilliant new red necktie, and a gardenia
in his button-hole. He seemed happy, wholesome, earnest, and
unaffected. He had the elasticity of youth with the firm wisdom of
age. And it was as if he had never been younger and would never grow
older, remaining always at just thirty and in his prime. Incomparable
to the rest, he was clearly born to lead. He fulfilled his functions
with tact, grace, and dignity. In such an affair as this present he
disclosed the attributes of the skilled workman, whose easy and exact
movements are a joy and wonder to the beholder. And behind all was the
man, his excellent and strong nature, his kindliness, his sincerity.
Yes, to Anna, Mynors was perfect that night; the reality of him
exceeded her dreamy meditations. Fearful on the brink of an ecstatic
bliss, she could scarcely believe that from the enticements of a
thousand women this paragon had been preserved for her. Like most of
us, she lacked the high courage to grasp happiness boldly and without
apprehension; she had not learnt that nothing is too good to be true.
