Anna was relieved when these two began to chatter. She had at once, by
a firm natural impulse, subdued the agitation which seized her when she
found Mynors waiting with such an obvious intention at the school door;
she had conversed with him in tones of quiet ease; his attitude had
even enabled her in a few moments to establish a pleasant familiarity
with him. Nevertheless, as they joined the stream of people in Moor
Road, she longed to be at home, in her kitchen, in order to examine
herself and the new situation thus created by Mynors. And yet also she
was glad that she must remain at his side, but it was a fluttered joy
that his presence gave her, too strange for immediate appreciation. As
her eye, without directly looking at him, embraced the suave and
admirable male creature within its field of vision, she became aware
that he was quite inscrutable to her. What were his inmost thoughts,
his ideals, the histories of his heart? Surely it was impossible that
she should ever know these secrets! He--and she: they were utterly
foreign to each other. So the primary dissonances of sex vibrated
within her, and her own feelings puzzled her. Still, there was an
instant pleasure, delightful, if disturbing and inexplicable. And also
there was a sensation of triumph, which, though she tried to scorn it,
she could not banish. That a man and a woman should saunter together
on that road was nothing; but the circumstance acquired tremendous
importance when the man happened to be Henry Mynors and the woman Anna
Tellwright. Mynors--handsome, dark, accomplished, exemplary and
prosperous--had walked for ten years circumspect and unscathed amid the
glances of a whole legion of maids. As for Anna, the peculiarity of
her position had always marked her for special attention: ever since
her father settled in Bursley, she had felt herself to be the object of
an interest in which awe and pity were equally mingled. She guessed
that the fact of her going to the Park with Mynors that afternoon would
pass swiftly from mouth to mouth like the rumour of a decisive event.
She had no friends; her innate reserve had been misinterpreted, and she
was not popular among the Wesleyan community. Many people would say,
and more would think, that it was her money which was drawing Mynors
from the narrow path of his celibate discretion. She could imagine all
the innuendoes, the expressive nods, the pursing of lips, the lifting
of shoulders and of eyebrows. "Money 'll do owt': that was the
proverb. But she cared not. She had the just and unshakable
self-esteem which is fundamental in all strong and righteous natures;
and she knew beyond the possibility of doubt that, though Mynors might
have no incurable aversion to a fortune, she herself, the spirit and
body of her, had been the sole awakener of his desire.
