"Come and see a plate made: that is one of the simplest things, and the
batting-machine is worth looking at," said Mynors, and they went into
the nearest shop, a hot interior in the shape of four corridors round a
solid square middle. Here men and women were working side by side, the
women subordinate to the men. All were preoccupied, wrapped up in
their respective operations, and there was the sound of irregular
whirring movements from every part of the big room. The air was laden
with whitish dust, and clay was omnipresent--on the floor, the walls,
the benches, the windows, on clothes, hands and faces. It was in this
shop, where both hollow-ware pressers and flat pressers were busy as
only craftsmen on piecework can be busy, that more than anywhere else
clay was to be seen 'in the hand of the potter." Near the door a stout
man with a good-humoured face flung some clay on to a revolving disc,
and even as Anna passed a jar sprang into existence. One instant the
clay was an amorphous mass, the next it was a vessel perfectly
circular, of a prescribed width and a prescribed depth; the flat and
apparently clumsy fingers of the craftsman had seemed to lose
themselves in the clay for a fraction of time, and the miracle was
accomplished. The man threw these vessels with the rapidity of a Roman
candle throwing off coloured stars, and one woman was kept busy in
supplying him with material and relieving his bench of the finished
articles. Mynors drew Anna along to the batting-machines for plate
makers, at that period rather a novelty and the latest invention of the
dead genius whose brain has reconstituted a whole industry on new
lines. Confronted with a piece of clay, the batting-machine descended
upon it with the ferocity of a wild animal, worried it, stretched it,
smoothed it into the width and thickness of a plate, and then desisted
of itself and waited inactive for the flat presser to remove its victim
to his more exact shaping machine. Several men were producing plates,
but their rapid labours seemed less astonishing than the preliminary
feat of the batting-machine. All the ware as it was moulded
disappeared into the vast cupboards occupying the centre of the shop,
where Mynors showed Anna innumerable rows of shelves full of pots in
process of steam-drying. Neither time nor space nor material was
wasted in this ant-heap of industry. In order to move to and fro, the
women were compelled to insinuate themselves past the stationary bodies
of the men. Anna marvelled at the careless accuracy with which they
fed the batting-machines with lumps precisely calculated to form a
plate of a given diameter. Everyone exerted himself as though the
salvation of the world hung on the production of so much stuff by a
certain hour; dust, heat, and the presence of a stranger were alike
unheeded in the mad creative passion.
