Anna sat in the bay-window of the front parlour, her accustomed place
on Sunday evenings in summer, and watched Mr. Tellwright and Agnes
disappear down the slope of Trafalgar Road on their way to chapel.
Trafalgar Road is the long thoroughfare which, under many aliases, runs
through the Five Towns from end to end, uniting them as a river might
unite them. Ephraim Tellwright could remember the time when this part
of it was a country lane, flanked by meadows and market gardens. Now
it was a street of houses up to and beyond Bleakridge, where the
Tellwrights lived; on the other side of the hill the houses came only
in patches until the far-stretching borders of Hanbridge were reached.
Within the municipal limits Bleakridge was the pleasantest quarter of
Bursley--Hillport, abode of the highest fashion, had its own government
and authority--and to reside 'at the top of Trafalgar Road' was still
the final ambition of many citizens, though the natural growth of the
town had robbed Bleakridge of some of that exclusive distinction which
it once possessed. Trafalgar Road, in its journey to Bleakridge from
the centre of the town, underwent certain changes of character. First
came a succession of manufactories and small shops; then, at the
beginning of the rise, a quarter of a mile of superior cottages; and
lastly, on the brow, occurred the houses of the comfortable-detached,
semi-detached, and in terraces, with rentals from 25_l._ to 60_l._ a
year. The Tellwrights lived in Manor Terrace (the name being a last
reminder of the great farmstead which formerly occupied the western
hill side): their house, of light yellow brick, was two-storied, with a
long narrow garden behind, and the rent 30_l_. Exactly opposite was an
antique red mansion, standing back in its own ground--home of the
Mynors family for two generations, but now a school, the Mynors family
being extinct in the district save for one member. Somewhat higher up,
still on the opposite side to Manor Terrace, came an imposing row of
four new houses, said to be the best planned and best built in the
town, each erected separately and occupied by its owner. The nearest
of these four was Councillor Sutton's, valued at 60_l._ a year. Lower
down, below Manor Terrace and on the same side, lived the Wesleyan
superintendent minister, the vicar of St. Luke's Church, an alderman,
and a doctor.
