Anna had never been in Edward Street before. It was a miserable
quarter--two rows of blackened infinitesimal cottages, and her
manufactory at the end--a frontier post of the town. Price's works was
small, old-fashioned, and out of repair--one of those properties which
are forlorn from the beginning, which bring despair into the hearts of
a succession of owners, and which, being ultimately deserted, seem to
stand for ever in pitiable ruin. The arched entrance for carts into
the yard was at the top of the steepest rise of the street, when it
might as well have been at the bottom; and this was but one example of
the architect's fine disregard for the principle of economy in
working--that principle to which in the scheming of manufactories
everything else is now so strictly subordinated. Ephraim Tellwright
used to say (but not to Titus Price) that the situation of that archway
cost five pounds a year in horseflesh, and that five pounds was the
interest on a hundred. The place was badly located, badly planned and
badly constructed. Its faults defied improvement. Titus Price
remained in it only because he was chained there by arrears of rent;
Tellwright hesitated to sell it only because the rent was a hundred a
year, and the whole freehold would not have fetched eight hundred. He
promised repairs in exchange for payment of arrears which he knew would
never be paid, and his policy was to squeeze the last penny out of
Price without forcing him into bankruptcy. Such was the predicament
when Anna assumed ownership. As she surveyed the irregular and huddled
frontage from the opposite side of the street, her first feeling was
one of depression at the broken and dirty panes of the windows. A man
in shirt-sleeves was standing on the weighing platform under the
archway; his back was towards her, but she could see the smoke issuing
in puffs from his pipe. She crossed the road. Hearing her footfalls,
the man turned round: it was Titus Price himself. He was wearing an
apron, but no cap; the sleeves of his shirt were rolled up, exposing
forearms covered with auburn hair. His puffed, heavy face, and general
bigness and untidiness, gave the idea of a vast and torpid male
slattern. Anna was astounded by the contrast between the Titus of
Sunday and the Titus of Monday: a single glance compelled her to
readjust all her notions of the man. She stammered a greeting, and he
replied, and then they were both silent for a moment: in the pause Mr.
Price thrust his pipe between apron and waistcoat.
