Three years after the death of his first wife it was rumoured that he
would marry again, and that his choice had fallen on a young orphan
girl, thirty years his junior, who 'assisted' at the stationer's shop
where he bought his daily newspaper. The rumour was well-founded.
Anna, then eight years of age, vividly remembered the home-coming of
the pale wife, and her own sturdy attempts to explain, excuse, or
assuage to this wistful and fragile creature the implacable harshness
of her father's temper. Agnes was born within a year, and the pale
girl died of puerperal fever. In that year lay a whole tragedy, which
could not have been more poignant in its perfection if the year had
been a thousand years. Ephraim promptly re-engaged the old
housekeeper, a course which filled Anna with secret childish revolt,
for Anna was now nine, and accomplished in all domesticity. In another
seven years the housekeeper died, a gaunt grey ruin, and Anna at
sixteen became mistress of the household, with a small sister to
cherish and control. About this time Anna began to perceive that her
father was generally regarded as a man of great wealth, having few
rivals in the entire region of the Five Towns, Definite knowledge,
however, she had none: he never spoke of his affairs; she knew only
that he possessed houses and other property in various places, that he
always turned first to the money article in the newspaper, and that
long envelopes arrived for him by post almost daily. But she had once
heard the surmise that he was worth sixty thousand of his own, apart
from the fortune of his first wife, Anna's mother. Nevertheless, it
did not occur to her to think of her father, in plain terms, as a
miser, until one day she happened to read in the "Staffordshire Signal'
some particulars of the last will and testament of William Wilbraham,
J.P., who had just died. Mr. Wilbraham had been a famous magnate and
benefactor of the Five Towns; his revered name was in every mouth; he
had a fine seat, Hillport House, at Hillport; and his superb horses
were constantly seen, winged and nervous, in the streets of Bursley and
Hanbridge. The "Signal' said that the net value of his estate was
sworn at fifty-nine thousand pounds. This single fact added a definite
and startling significance to figures which had previously conveyed
nothing to Anna except an idea of vastness. The crude contrast between
the things of Hillport House and the things of the six-roomed abode in
Manor Terrace gave food for reflection, silent but profound.
