Anna was disturbed by the arrival at the front door of the milk-girl.
Alternately with her father, she stayed at home on Sunday evenings,
partly to receive the evening milk and partly to guard the house. The
Persian cat with one ear preceded her to the door as soon as he heard
the clatter of the can. The stout little milk-girl dispensed one pint
of milk into Anna's jug, and spilt an eleemosynary supply on the step
for the cat. "He does like it fresh, Miss," said the milk-girl,
smiling at the greedy cat, and then, with a "Lovely evenin"," departed
down the street, one fat red arm stretched horizontally out to balance
the weight of the can in the other. Anna leaned idly against the
doorpost, waiting while the cat finished, until at length the swaying
figure of the milk-girl disappeared in the dip of the road. Suddenly
she darted within, shutting the door, and stood on the hall-mat in a
startled attitude of dismay. She had caught sight of Henry Mynors in
the distance, approaching the house. At that moment the kitchen clock
struck seven, and Mynors, according to the rule of a lifetime, should
have been in his place in the 'orchestra' (or, as some term it, the
'singing-seat') of the chapel, where he was an admired baritone. Anna
dared not conjecture what impulse had led him into this extraordinary,
incredible deviation. She dared not conjecture, but despite herself
she knew, and the knowledge shocked her sensitive and peremptory
conscience. Her heart began to beat rapidly; she was in distress.
Aware that her father and sister had left her alone, did he mean to
call? It was absolutely impossible, yet she feared it, and blushed,
all solitary there in the passage, for shame. Now she heard his sharp,
decided footsteps, and through the glazed panels of the door she could
see the outline of his form. He stopped; his hand was on the gate, and
she ceased to breathe. He pushed the gate open, and then, at the
whisper of some blessed angel, he closed it again and continued his way
up the street. After a few moments Anna carried the milk into the
kitchen, and stood by the dresser, moveless, each muscle braced in the
intensity of profound contemplation. Gradually the tears rose to her
eyes and fell; they were the tincture of a strange and mystic joy, too
poignant to be endured. As it were under compulsion she ran outside,
and down the garden path to the low wall which looked over the grey
fields of the valley up to Hillport. Exactly opposite, a mile and a
half away, on the ridge, was Hillport Church, dark and clear against
the orange sky. To the right, and nearer, lay the central masses of
the town, tier on tier of richly-coloured ovens and chimneys. Along
the field-paths couples moved slowly. All was quiescent, languorous,
beautiful in the glow of the sun's stately declension. Anna put her
arms on the wall. Far more impressively than in the afternoon she
realised that this was the end of one epoch in her career and the
beginning of another. Enthralled by austere traditions and that stern
conscience of hers, she had never permitted herself to dream of the
possibility of an escape from the parental servitude. She had never
looked beyond the horizons of her present world, but had sought
spiritual satisfaction in the ideas of duty and sacrifice. The worst
tyrannies of her father never dulled the sense of her duty to him; and,
without perhaps being aware of it, she had rather despised love and the
dalliance of the sexes. In her attitude towards such things there had
been not only a little contempt but also some disapproval, as though
man were destined for higher ends. Now she saw, in a quick revelation,
that it was the lovers, and not she, who had the right to scorn. She
saw how miserably narrow, tepid, and trickling the stream of her life
had been, and had threatened to be. Now it gushed forth warm,
impetuous, and full, opening out new and delicious vistas. She lived;
and she was finding the sight to see, the courage to enjoy. Now, as
she leaned over the wall, she would not have cared if Henry Mynors
indeed had called that night. She perceived something splendid and
free in his abandonment of habit and discretion at the bidding of a
desire. To be the magnet which could draw that pattern and exemplar of
seemliness from the strict orbit of virtuous custom! It was she, the
miser's shabby daughter, who had caused this amazing phenomenon. The
thought intoxicated her. Without the support of the wall she might
have fallen. In a sort of trance she murmured these words: "He loves
me."
