"Greenland. Is Fagin upstairs?"

"This is him, Fagin," said Jack Dawkins;"my friend Oliver Twist."

"Aha!" said the Jew, shrugging up his shoulders, and distorting every
feature with a hideous grin. "Clever dogs! Clever dogs! Staunch to the
last! Never told the old parson where they were. Never poached upon old
Fagin! And why should they? It wouldn't have loosened the knot, or kept
the drop up, a minute longer. No, no, no! Fine fellows! Fine fellows!"

"And what have you got, my dear?" said Fagin to Charley Bates.

"There, my dear," said Fagin. "That's a pleasant life, isn't it? They
have gone out for the day."

"What'll Fagin say?" inquired the Dodger; taking advantage of the next
interval of breathlessness on the part of his friend to propound the
question.

Mr. Fagin looked so very much in earnest, that Charley Bates, who
deemed it prudent in all cases to be on the safe side, and who
conceived it by no means improbable that it might be his turn to be
throttled second, dropped upon his knees, and raised a loud,
well-sustained, and continuous roar--something between a mad bull and a
speaking trumpet.

"Why, what the blazes is in the wind now!" growled a deep voice. "Who
pitched that "ere at me? It's well it's the beer, and not the pot, as
hit me, or I'd have settled somebody. I might have know'd, as nobody
but an infernal, rich, plundering, thundering old Jew could afford to
throw away any drink but water--and not that, unless he done the River
Company every quarter. Wot's it all about, Fagin? D--me, if my
neck-handkercher an't lined with beer! Come in, you sneaking warmint;
wot are you stopping outside for, as if you was ashamed of your master!
Come in!"

"That's very likely," returned Sikes with a malicious grin. "You're
blowed upon, Fagin."

The prudence of this line of action, indeed, was obvious; but,
unfortunately, there was one very strong objection to its being
adopted. This was, that the Dodger, and Charley Bates, and Fagin, and
Mr. William Sikes, happened, one and all, to entertain a violent and
deeply-rooted antipathy to going near a police-office on any ground or
pretext whatever.

"That it won't do; so it's no use a-trying it on, Fagin," replied Nancy.

"She'll go, Fagin," said Sikes.

"No, she won't, Fagin," said Nancy.

"Yes, she will, Fagin," said Sikes.

"Give her a door-key to carry in her t"other one, Fagin," said Sikes;
"it looks real and genivine like."

"I didn't know, my dear, I didn't know," replied Fagin, humbly; for the
Jew was the new comer.

"Oh no! You hear nothing, you don't," retorted Sikes with a fierce
sneer. "Sneaking in and out, so as nobody hears how you come or go! I
wish you had been the dog, Fagin, half a minute ago."

"Grin away," said Sikes, replacing the poker, and surveying him with
savage contempt; "grin away. You'll never have the laugh at me,
though, unless it's behind a nightcap. I"ve got the upper hand over
you, Fagin; and, d--me, I'll keep it. There! If I go, you go; so take
care of me."

"It's all passed safe through the melting-pot," replied Fagin, "and
this is your share. It's rather more than it ought to be, my dear; but
as I know you'll do me a good turn another time, and--"

These words, in plain English, conveyed an injunction to ring the bell.
It was answered by another Jew: younger than Fagin, but nearly as vile
and repulsive in appearance.

Bill Sikes merely pointed to the empty measure. The Jew, perfectly
understanding the hint, retired to fill it: previously exchanging a
remarkable look with Fagin, who raised his eyes for an instant, as if
in expectation of it, and shook his head in reply; so slightly that the
action would have been almost imperceptible to an observant third
person. It was lost upon Sikes, who was stooping at the moment to tie
the boot-lace which the dog had torn. Possibly, if he had observed the
brief interchange of signals, he might have thought that it boded no
good to him.

"Is anybody here, Barney?" inquired Fagin; speaking, now that that
Sikes was looking on, without raising his eyes from the ground.

"Nobody?" inquired Fagin, in a tone of surprise: which perhaps might
mean that Barney was at liberty to tell the truth.

Barney looked timidly at Fagin, as if for permission; the Jew remaining
silent, and not lifting his eyes from the ground, he retired; and
presently returned, ushering in Nancy; who was decorated with the
bonnet, apron, basket, and street-door key, complete.

"Ah, Nancy, dear!" said Fagin, looking up.

Now, whether a peculiar contraction of the Jew's red eye-brows, and a
half closing of his deeply-set eyes, warned Miss Nancy that she was
disposed to be too communicative, is not a matter of much importance.
The fact is all we need care for here; and the fact is, that she
suddenly checked herself, and with several gracious smiles upon Mr.
Sikes, turned the conversation to other matters. In about ten minutes"
time, Mr. Fagin was seized with a fit of coughing; upon which Nancy
pulled her shawl over her shoulders, and declared it was time to go.
Mr. Sikes, finding that he was walking a short part of her way himself,
expressed his intention of accompanying her; they went away together,
followed, at a little distant, by the dog, who slunk out of a back-yard
as soon as his master was out of sight.

"Oh, my wig, my wig!" cried Master Charles Bates, from whose lungs the
laughter had proceeded: "here he is! oh, cry, here he is! Oh, Fagin,
look at him! Fagin, do look at him! I can't bear it; it is such a
jolly game, I cant" bear it. Hold me, somebody, while I laugh it out."

"Look at his togs, Fagin!" said Charley, putting the light so close to
his new jacket as nearly to set him on fire. "Look at his togs!
Superfine cloth, and the heavy swell cut! Oh, my eye, what a game!
And his books, too! Nothing but a gentleman, Fagin!"

At his, Master Bates roared again: so loud, that Fagin himself relaxed,
and even the Dodger smiled; but as the Artful drew forth the five-pound
note at that instant, it is doubtful whether the sally of the discovery
awakened his merriment.

"Hallo, what's that?" inquired Sikes, stepping forward as the Jew
seized the note. "That's mine, Fagin."

"The boy's right," remarked Fagin, looking covertly round, and knitting
his shaggy eyebrows into a hard knot. "You're right, Oliver, you're
right; they WILL think you have stolen "em. Ha! ha!" chuckled the Jew,
rubbing his hands, "it couldn't have happened better, if we had chosen
our time!"

"What's the matter here!" said Fagin, looking round.

"No, she hasn't," said Nancy, pale and breathless from the scuffle;
"no, she hasn't, Fagin; don't think it."

Mr. Fagin was sufficiently well acquainted with the manners and customs
of that particular species of humanity to which Nancy belonged, to feel
tolerably certain that it would be rather unsafe to prolong any
conversation with her, at present. With the view of diverting the
attention of the company, he turned to Oliver.

"I won't stand by and see it done, Fagin," cried the girl. "You"ve got
the boy, and what more would you have?--Let him be--let him be--or I
shall put that mark on some of you, that will bring me to the gallows
before my time."

"Am I!" said the girl. "Take care I don't overdo it. You will be the
worse for it, Fagin, if I do; and so I tell you in good time to keep
clear of me."

"I suppose he'd better not wear his best clothes tomorrow, Fagin, had
he?" inquired Charley Bates.

Master Bates, apparently much delighted with his commission, took the
cleft stick: and led Oliver into an adjacent kitchen, where there were
two or three of the beds on which he had slept before; and here, with
many uncontrollable bursts of laughter, he produced the identical old
suit of clothes which Oliver had so much congratulated himself upon
leaving off at Mr. Brownlow's; and the accidental display of which, to
Fagin, by the Jew who purchased them, had been the very first clue
received, of his whereabout.

"Put off the smart ones," said Charley, "and I'll give "em to Fagin to
take care of. What fun it is!"

About noon next day, when the Dodger and Master Bates had gone out to
pursue their customary avocations, Mr. Fagin took the opportunity of
reading Oliver a long lecture on the crying sin of ingratitude; of
which he clearly demonstrated he had been guilty, to no ordinary
extent, in wilfully absenting himself from the society of his anxious
friends; and, still more, in endeavouring to escape from them after so
much trouble and expense had been incurred in his recovery. Mr. Fagin
laid great stress on the fact of his having taken Oliver in, and
cherished him, when, without his timely aid, he might have perished
with hunger; and he related the dismal and affecting history of a young
lad whom, in his philanthropy, he had succoured under parallel
circumstances, but who, proving unworthy of his confidence and evincing
a desire to communicate with the police, had unfortunately come to be
hanged at the Old Bailey one morning. Mr. Fagin did not seek to
conceal his share in the catastrophe, but lamented with tears in his
eyes that the wrong-headed and treacherous behaviour of the young
person in question, had rendered it necessary that he should become the
victim of certain evidence for the crown: which, if it were not
precisely true, was indispensably necessary for the safety of him (Mr.
Fagin) and a few select friends. Mr. Fagin concluded by drawing a
rather disagreeable picture of the discomforts of hanging; and, with
great friendliness and politeness of manner, expressed his anxious
hopes that he might never be obliged to submit Oliver Twist to that
unpleasant operation.

"I am," repeated the Dodger. "So's Charley. So's Fagin. So's Sikes.
So's Nancy. So's Bet. So we all are, down to the dog. And he's the
downiest one of the lot!"

"No more it has," said Charley. "Why don't you put yourself under
Fagin, Oliver?"

"And Fagin would RATHER not!" rejoined Charley.

"That," rejoined the Dodger, with a wave of his pipe, "That was all out
of consideration for Fagin, "cause the traps know that we work
together, and he might have got into trouble if we hadn't made our
lucky; that was the move, wasn't it, Charley?"

"You"ve been brought up bad," said the Dodger, surveying his boots with
much satisfaction when Oliver had polished them. "Fagin will make
something of you, though, or you'll be the first he ever had that
turned out unprofitable. You'd better begin at once; for you'll come
to the trade long before you think of it; and you're only losing time,
Oliver."

Master Bates backed this advice with sundry moral admonitions of his
own: which, being exhausted, he and his friend Mr. Dawkins launched
into a glowing description of the numerous pleasures incidental to the
life they led, interspersed with a variety of hints to Oliver that the
best thing he could do, would be to secure Fagin's favour without more
delay, by the means which they themselves had employed to gain it.

"He's in luck, then," said the young man, with a meaning look at Fagin.
"Never mind where I came from, young "un; you'll find your way there,
soon enough, I'll bet a crown!"

At this sally, the boys laughed. After some more jokes on the same
subject, they exchanged a few short whispers with Fagin; and withdrew.

After some words apart between the last comer and Fagin, they drew
their chairs towards the fire; and the Jew, telling Oliver to come and
sit by him, led the conversation to the topics most calculated to
interest his hearers. These were, the great advantages of the trade,
the proficiency of the Dodger, the amiability of Charley Bates, and the
liberality of the Jew himself. At length these subjects displayed
signs of being thoroughly exhausted; and Mr. Chitling did the same:
for the house of correction becomes fatiguing after a week or two.
Miss Betsy accordingly withdrew; and left the party to their repose.

From this day, Oliver was seldom left alone; but was placed in almost
constant communication with the two boys, who played the old game with
the Jew every day: whether for their own improvement or Oliver's, Mr.
Fagin best knew. At other times the old man would tell them stories of
robberies he had committed in his younger days: mixed up with so much
that was droll and curious, that Oliver could not help laughing
heartily, and showing that he was amused in spite of all his better
feelings.

Apparently, the dog had been somewhat deceived by Mr. Fagin's outer
garment; for as the Jew unbuttoned it, and threw it over the back of a
chair, he retired to the corner from which he had risen: wagging his
tail as he went, to show that he was as well satisfied as it was in his
nature to be.

The latter recognition was uttered with just enough of embarrassment to
imply a doubt of its reception; for Mr. Fagin and his young friend had
not met, since she had interfered in behalf of Oliver. All doubts upon
the subject, if he had any, were speedily removed by the young lady's
behaviour. She took her feet off the fender, pushed back her chair,
and bade Fagin draw up his, without saying more about it: for it was a
cold night, and no mistake.

"Fagin," said Sikes, abruptly breaking the stillness that prevailed;
"is it worth fifty shiners extra, if it's safely done from the outside?"

"Nonsense," rejoined the girl coolly, "Go on, Fagin. I know what he's
going to say, Bill; he needn't mind me."

"Why, you don't mind the old girl, do you, Fagin?" he asked at length.
"You"ve known her long enough to trust her, or the Devil's in it. She
ain't one to blab. Are you Nancy?"

"Now, Fagin," said Nancy with a laugh. "Tell Bill at once, about
Oliver!"

"I know he is," rejoined Fagin. "He's been in good training these last
few weeks, and it's time he began to work for his bread. Besides, the
others are all too big."

"Frighten him!" echoed Sikes. "It'll be no sham frightening, mind you.
If there's anything queer about him when we once get into the work; in
for a penny, in for a pound. You won't see him alive again, Fagin.
Think of that, before you send him. Mark my words!" said the robber,
poising a crowbar, which he had drawn from under the bedstead.

"When is it to be done?" asked Nancy, stopping some turbulent
exclamation on the part of Mr. Sikes, expressive of the disgust with
which he received Fagin's affectation of humanity.

After some discussion, in which all three took an active part, it was
decided that Nancy should repair to the Jew's next evening when the
night had set in, and bring Oliver away with her; Fagin craftily
observing, that, if he evinced any disinclination to the task, he would
be more willing to accompany the girl who had so recently interfered in
his behalf, than anybody else. It was also solemnly arranged that poor
Oliver should, for the purposes of the contemplated expedition, be
unreservedly consigned to the care and custody of Mr. William Sikes;
and further, that the said Sikes should deal with him as he thought
fit; and should not be held responsible by the Jew for any mischance or
evil that might be necessary to visit him: it being understood that, to
render the compact in this respect binding, any representations made by
Mr. Sikes on his return should be required to be confirmed and
corroborated, in all important particulars, by the testimony of flash
Toby Crackit.

Beguiling the time with these pleasant reflections, Mr. Fagin wended
his way, through mud and mire, to his gloomy abode: where the Dodger
was sitting up, impatiently awaiting his return.

"Why, do you think?" inquired Fagin, parrying the question.

The Jew seemed much vexed by Oliver's not expressing any greater
curiosity on the subject; but the truth is, that, although Oliver felt
very anxious, he was too much confused by the earnest cunning of
Fagin's looks, and his own speculations, to make any further inquiries
just then. He had no other opportunity: for the Jew remained very
surly and silent till night: when he prepared to go abroad.

He could think of no bad object to be attained by sending him to Sikes,
which would not be equally well answered by his remaining with Fagin;
and after meditating for a long time, concluded that he had been
selected to perform some ordinary menial offices for the housebreaker,
until another boy, better suited for his purpose could be engaged. He
was too well accustomed to suffering, and had suffered too much where
he was, to bewail the prospect of change very severely. He remained
lost in thought for some minutes; and then, with a heavy sigh, snuffed
the candle, and, taking up the book which the Jew had left with him,
began to read.

"Fagin's, eh!" exclaimed Toby, looking at Oliver. "Wot an inwalable
boy that'll make, for the old ladies" pockets in chapels! His mug is a
fortin" to him."

Sikes, invoking terrific imprecations upon Fagin's head for sending
Oliver on such an errand, plied the crowbar vigorously, but with little
noise. After some delay, and some assistance from Toby, the shutter to
which he had referred, swung open on its hinges.

While these things were passing in the country workhouse, Mr. Fagin sat
in the old den--the same from which Oliver had been removed by the
girl--brooding over a dull, smoky fire. He held a pair of bellows upon
his knee, with which he had apparently been endeavouring to rouse it
into more cheerful action; but he had fallen into deep thought; and
with his arms folded on them, and his chin resting on his thumbs, fixed
his eyes, abstractedly, on the rusty bars.

"Matter, Fagin!" cried Charley. "I wish you had watched the play.
Tommy Chitling hasn't won a point; and I went partners with him against
the Artfull and dumb."

"No more of it for me, thank "ee, Fagin," replied Mr. Chitling; "I"ve
had enough. That "ere Dodger has such a run of luck that there's no
standing again" him."

"How precious dull you are, Tommy!" said the Dodger, stopping short
when there had been a long silence; and addressing Mr. Chitling. "What
do you think he's thinking of, Fagin?"

"_I_ should say," replied Master Bates, with a grin, "that he was
uncommon sweet upon Betsy. See how he's a-blushing! Oh, my eye!
here's a merry-go-rounder! Tommy Chitling's in love! Oh, Fagin,
Fagin! what a spree!"

"What I mean to say, Fagin," replied Mr. Chitling, very red in the
face, "is, that that isn't anything to anybody here."

"So I _do_ do as she bids me," replied Mr. Chitling; "I shouldn't have
been milled, if it hadn't been for her advice. But it turned out a
good job for you; didn't it, Fagin! And what's six weeks of it? It
must come, some time or another, and why not in the winter time when
you don't want to go out a-walking so much; eh, Fagin?"

"I mean to say that I shouldn't," replied Tom, angrily. "There, now.
Ah! Who'll say as much as that, I should like to know; eh, Fagin?"

"I might have got clear off, if I'd split upon her; mightn't I, Fagin?"
angrily pursued the poor half-witted dupe. "A word from me would have
done it; wouldn't it, Fagin?"

"But I didn't blab it; did I, Fagin?" demanded Tom, pouring question
upon question with great volubility.

"Perhaps I was," rejoined Tom, looking round; "and if I was, what's to
laugh at, in that; eh, Fagin?"

The bell was rung again, with some impatience, while the party were in
darkness. After a short pause, the Dodger reappeared, and whispered
Fagin mysteriously.

"Why, the sight of you, Mr. Fagin, would cure the hoptalmy!" said this
respectable trader, in acknowledgment of the Jew's inquiry after his
health.

"The neighbourhood was a little too hot, Lively," said Fagin, elevating
his eyebrows, and crossing his hands upon his shoulders.

Fagin nodded in the affirmative. Pointing in the direction of Saffron
Hill, he inquired whether any one was up yonder to-night.

"Are you going up to the Cripples, Fagin?" cried the little man,
calling after him. "Stop! I don't mind if I have a drop there with
you!"

The Three Cripples, or rather the Cripples; which was the sign by which
the establishment was familiarly known to its patrons: was the
public-house in which Mr. Sikes and his dog have already figured.
Merely making a sign to a man at the bar, Fagin walked straight
upstairs, and opening the door of a room, and softly insinuating
himself into the chamber, looked anxiously about: shading his eyes with
his hand, as if in search of some particular person.

As Fagin stepped softly in, the professional gentleman, running over
the keys by way of prelude, occasioned a general cry of order for a
song; which having subsided, a young lady proceeded to entertain the
company with a ballad in four verses, between each of which the
accompanyist played the melody all through, as loud as he could. When
this was over, the chairman gave a sentiment, after which, the
professional gentleman on the chairman's right and left volunteered a
duet, and sang it, with great applause.

Fagin, troubled by no grave emotions, looked eagerly from face to face
while these proceedings were in progress; but apparently without
meeting that of which he was in search. Succeeding, at length, in
catching the eye of the man who occupied the chair, he beckoned to him
slightly, and left the room, as quietly as he had entered it.

"What can I do for you, Mr. Fagin?" inquired the man, as he followed
him out to the landing. "Won't you join us? They'll be delighted,
every one of "em."

"And no news of Barney?" inquired Fagin.

She was in her room, the woman said. Fagin crept softly upstairs, and
entered it without any previous ceremony. The girl was alone; lying
with her head upon the table, and her hair straggling over it.

"What is it?" pursued Fagin, mad with rage. "When the boy's worth
hundreds of pounds to me, am I to lose what chance threw me in the way
of getting safely, through the whims of a drunken gang that I could
whistle away the lives of! And me bound, too, to a born devil that
only wants the will, and has the power to, to--"

"Don't worry me now, Fagin!" replied the girl, raising her head
languidly. "If Bill has not done it this time, he will another. He has
done many a good job for you, and will do many more when he can; and
when he can't he won't; so no more about that."

Fagin put several other questions: all with the same drift of
ascertaining whether the girl had profited by his unguarded hints; but,
she answered them so readily, and was withal so utterly unmoved by his
searching looks, that his original impression of her being more than a
trifle in liquor, was confirmed. Nancy, indeed, was not exempt from a
failing which was very common among the Jew's female pupils; and in
which, in their tenderer years, they were rather encouraged than
checked. Her disordered appearance, and a wholesale perfume of Geneva
which pervaded the apartment, afforded strong confirmatory evidence of
the justice of the Jew's supposition; and when, after indulging in the
temporary display of violence above described, she subsided, first into
dullness, and afterwards into a compound of feelings: under the
influence of which she shed tears one minute, and in the next gave
utterance to various exclamations of "Never say die!" and divers
calculations as to what might be the amount of the odds so long as a
lady or gentleman was happy, Mr. Fagin, who had had considerable
experience of such matters in his time, saw, with great satisfaction,
that she was very far gone indeed.

Having eased his mind by this discovery; and having accomplished his
twofold object of imparting to the girl what he had, that night, heard,
and of ascertaining, with his own eyes, that Sikes had not returned,
Mr. Fagin again turned his face homeward: leaving his young friend
asleep, with her head upon the table.

"Fagin!" whispered a voice close to his ear.

Fagin looked as if he could have willingly excused himself from taking
home a visitor at that unseasonable hour; and, indeed, muttered
something about having no fire; but his companion repeating his request
in a peremptory manner, he unlocked the door, and requested him to
close it softly, while he got a light.

"Shut the door," whispered Fagin from the end of the passage. As he
spoke, it closed with a loud noise.

Fagin stealthily descended the kitchen stairs. After a short absence,
he returned with a lighted candle, and the intelligence that Toby
Crackit was asleep in the back room below, and that the boys were in
the front one. Beckoning the man to follow him, he led the way
upstairs.

They conversed for some time in whispers. Though nothing of the
conversation was distinguishable beyond a few disjointed words here and
there, a listener might easily have perceived that Fagin appeared to be
defending himself against some remarks of the stranger; and that the
latter was in a state of considerable irritation. They might have been
talking, thus, for a quarter of an hour or more, when Monks--by which
name the Jew had designated the strange man several times in the course
of their colloquy--said, raising his voice a little,

"It's no fault of mine if he is!" interposed the other man, with a look
of terror, and clasping the Jew's arm with trembling hands. "Mind
that. Fagin! I had no hand in it. Anything but his death, I told you
from the first. I won't shed blood; it's always found out, and haunts
a man besides. If they shot him dead, I was not the cause; do you hear
me? Fire this infernal den! What's that?"

Sending the plate, which had so excited Fagin's cupidity, to the
banker's; and leaving Giles and another servant in care of the house,
they departed to a cottage at some distance in the country, and took
Oliver with them.

"What's the matter here, my dear?" said Fagin, looking in.

With an exclamation of surprise, Fagin hastened to the girl's
assistance, while Mr. John Dawkins (otherwise the Artful Dodger), who
had followed his venerable friend into the room, hastily deposited on
the floor a bundle with which he was laden; and snatching a bottle from
the grasp of Master Charles Bates who came close at his heels, uncorked
it in a twinkling with his teeth, and poured a portion of its contents
down the patient's throat: previously taking a taste, himself, to
prevent mistakes.

"Give her a whiff of fresh air with the bellows, Charley," said Mr.
Dawkins; "and you slap her hands, Fagin, while Bill undoes the
petticuts."

"Why, what evil wind has blowed you here?" he asked Fagin.

In compliance with Mr. Fagin's request, the Artful untied this bundle,
which was of large size, and formed of an old table-cloth; and handed
the articles it contained, one by one, to Charley Bates: who placed
them on the table, with various encomiums on their rarity and
excellence.

"Ah!" said Fagin, rubbing his hands with great satisfaction. "You'll
do, Bill; you'll do now."

"Only hear him, boys!" said Fagin, shrugging his shoulders. "And us
come to bring him all these beau-ti-ful things."

"Don't be out of temper, my dear," urged Fagin, submissively. "I have
never forgot you, Bill; never once."

"There now, Bill," remonstrated Fagin, eagerly catching at the word.
"If it hadn't been for the girl! Who but poor ould Fagin was the means
of your having such a handy girl about you?"

Nancy's appearance gave a new turn to the conversation; for the boys,
receiving a sly wink from the wary old Jew, began to ply her with
liquor: of which, however, she took very sparingly; while Fagin,
assuming an unusual flow of spirits, gradually brought Mr. Sikes into a
better temper, by affecting to regard his threats as a little pleasant
banter; and, moreover, by laughing very heartily at one or two rough
jokes, which, after repeated applications to the spirit-bottle, he
condescended to make.

"Lots!" cried Fagin, holding up is hands. "I haven't so much as
would--"

"Well, well," said Fagin, with a sigh, "I'll send the Artful round
presently."

After a great deal of haggling and squabbling, Fagin beat down the
amount of the required advance from five pounds to three pounds four
and sixpence: protesting with many solemn asseverations that that would
only leave him eighteen-pence to keep house with; Mr. Sikes sullenly
remarking that if he couldn't get any more he must accompany him home;
with the Dodger and Master Bates put the eatables in the cupboard. The
Jew then, taking leave of his affectionate friend, returned homeward,
attended by Nancy and the boys: Mr. Sikes, meanwhile, flinging himself
on the bed, and composing himself to sleep away the time until the
young lady's return.

In due course, they arrived at Fagin's abode, where they found Toby
Crackit and Mr. Chitling intent upon their fifteenth game at cribbage,
which it is scarcely necessary to say the latter gentleman lost, and
with it, his fifteenth and last sixpence: much to the amusement of his
young friends. Mr. Crackit, apparently somewhat ashamed at being found
relaxing himself with a gentleman so much his inferior in station and
mental endowments, yawned, and inquiring after Sikes, took up his hat
to go.

"Has nobody been, Toby?" asked Fagin.

"Not a living leg," answered Mr. Crackit, pulling up his collar; "it's
been as dull as swipes. You ought to stand something handsome, Fagin,
to recompense me for keeping house so long. Damme, I"m as flat as a
juryman; and should have gone to sleep, as fast as Newgate, if I hadn't
had the good natur" to amuse this youngster. Horrid dull, I"m blessed
if I an't!"

"Not a bit of it," replied Mr. Chitling. "Am I, Fagin?"

"A very clever fellow, my dear," said Fagin, patting him on the
shoulder, and winking to his other pupils.

"And Mr. Crackit is a heavy swell; an't he, Fagin?" asked Tom.

"And it is a creditable thing to have his acquaintance; an't it,
Fagin?" pursued Tom.

"Ah!" cried Tom, triumphantly, "that's where it is! He has cleaned me
out. But I can go and earn some more, when I like; can't I, Fagin?"

"Now," said Fagin, when they had left the room, "I'll go and get you
that cash, Nancy. This is only the key of a little cupboard where I
keep a few odd things the boys get, my dear. I never lock up my money,
for I"ve got none to lock up, my dear--ha! ha! ha!--none to lock up.
It's a poor trade, Nancy, and no thanks; but I"m fond of seeing the
young people about me; and I bear it all, I bear it all. Hush!" he
said, hastily concealing the key in his breast; "who's that? Listen!"

The girl, who was sitting at the table with her arms folded, appeared
in no way interested in the arrival: or to care whether the person,
whoever he was, came or went: until the murmur of a man's voice
reached her ears. The instant she caught the sound, she tore off her
bonnet and shawl, with the rapidity of lightning, and thrust them under
the table. The Jew, turning round immediately afterwards, she muttered
a complaint of the heat: in a tone of languor that contrasted, very
remarkably, with the extreme haste and violence of this action: which,
however, had been unobserved by Fagin, who had his back towards her at
the time.

"Only one of my young people," said Fagin, observing that Monks drew
back, on beholding a stranger. "Don't move, Nancy."

The girl drew closer to the table, and glancing at Monks with an air of
careless levity, withdrew her eyes; but as he turned towards Fagin, she
stole another look; so keen and searching, and full of purpose, that if
there had been any bystander to observe the change, he could hardly
have believed the two looks to have proceeded from the same person.

"Any news?" inquired Fagin.

"And--and--good?" asked Fagin, hesitating as though he feared to vex
the other man by being too sanguine.

"Not that infernal hole we were in before," she could hear the man say
as they went upstairs. Fagin laughed; and making some reply which did
not reach her, seemed, by the creaking of the boards, to lead his
companion to the second story.

With a sigh for every piece of money, Fagin told the amount into her
hand. They parted without more conversation, merely interchanging a
"good-night."

It was fortunate for her that the possession of money occasioned him so
much employment next day in the way of eating and drinking; and withal
had so beneficial an effect in smoothing down the asperities of his
temper; that he had neither time nor inclination to be very critical
upon her behaviour and deportment. That she had all the abstracted and
nervous manner of one who is on the eve of some bold and hazardous
step, which it has required no common struggle to resolve upon, would
have been obvious to the lynx-eyed Fagin, who would most probably have
taken the alarm at once; but Mr. Sikes lacking the niceties of
discrimination, and being troubled with no more subtle misgivings than
those which resolve themselves into a dogged roughness of behaviour
towards everybody; and being, furthermore, in an unusually amiable
condition, as has been already observed; saw nothing unusual in her
demeanor, and indeed, troubled himself so little about her, that, had
her agitation been far more perceptible than it was, it would have been
very unlikely to have awakened his suspicions.

"Because," said the girl, "I am about to put my life and the lives of
others in your hands. I am the girl that dragged little Oliver back to
old Fagin's on the night he went out from the house in Pentonville."

"Then he goes by some other amongst us," rejoined the girl, "which I
more than thought before. Some time ago, and soon after Oliver was put
into your house on the night of the robbery, I--suspecting this
man--listened to a conversation held between him and Fagin in the dark.
I found out, from what I heard, that Monks--the man I asked you about,
you know--"

"--That Monks," pursued the girl, "had seen him accidently with two of
our boys on the day we first lost him, and had known him directly to be
the same child that he was watching for, though I couldn't make out
why. A bargain was struck with Fagin, that if Oliver was got back he
should have a certain sum; and he was to have more for making him a
thief, which this Monks wanted for some purpose of his own."

"I'll tell you, lady. Last night he came again. Again they went
upstairs, and I, wrapping myself up so that my shadow would not betray
me, again listened at the door. The first words I heard Monks say were
these: "So the only proofs of the boy's identity lie at the bottom of
the river, and the old hag that received them from the mother is
rotting in her coffin." They laughed, and talked of his success in
doing this; and Monks, talking on about the boy, and getting very wild,
said that though he had got the young devil's money safely now, he'd
rather have had it the other way; for, what a game it would have been
to have brought down the boast of the father's will, by driving him
through every jail in town, and then hauling him up for some capital
felony which Fagin could easily manage, after having made a good profit
of him besides."

"The truth, lady, though it comes from my lips," replied the girl.
"Then, he said, with oaths common enough in my ears, but strange to
yours, that if he could gratify his hatred by taking the boy's life
without bringing his own neck in danger, he would; but, as he couldn't,
he'd be upon the watch to meet him at every turn in life; and if he
took advantage of his birth and history, he might harm him yet. "In
short, Fagin," he says, "Jew as you are, you never laid such snares as
I'll contrive for my young brother, Oliver.""

Now, this back-room was immediately behind the bar, and some steps
lower, so that any person connected with the house, undrawing a small
curtain which concealed a single pane of glass fixed in the wall of the
last-named apartment, about five feet from its flooring, could not only
look down upon any guests in the back-room without any great hazard of
being observed (the glass being in a dark angle of the wall, between
which and a large upright beam the observer had to thrust himself), but
could, by applying his ear to the partition, ascertain with tolerable
distinctness, their subject of conversation. The landlord of the house
had not withdrawn his eye from this place of espial for five minutes,
and Barney had only just returned from making the communication above
related, when Fagin, in the course of his evening's business, came into
the bar to inquire after some of his young pupils.

Fagin appeared to receive this communication with great interest.

"So I mean to be a gentleman," said Mr. Claypole, kicking out his legs,
and continuing a conversation, the commencement of which Fagin had
arrived too late to hear. "No more jolly old coffins, Charlotte, but a
gentleman's life for me: and, if yer like, yer shall be a lady."

The stranger was Mr. Fagin. And very amiable he looked, and a very low
bow he made, as he advanced, and setting himself down at the nearest
table, ordered something to drink of the grinning Barney.

"A pleasant night, sir, but cool for the time of year," said Fagin,
rubbing his hands. "From the country, I see, sir?"

"We have not so much dust as that in London," replied Fagin, pointing
from Noah's shoes to those of his companion, and from them to the two
bundles.

Fagin followed up this remark by striking the side of his nose with his
right forefinger,--a gesture which Noah attempted to imitate, though
not with complete success, in consequence of his own nose not being
large enough for the purpose. However, Mr. Fagin seemed to interpret
the endeavour as expressing a perfect coincidence with his opinion, and
put about the liquor which Barney reappeared with, in a very friendly
manner.

"Dear!" said Fagin. "A man need be always emptying a till, or a
pocket, or a woman's reticule, or a house, or a mail-coach, or a bank,
if he drinks it regularly."

"Don't mind me, my dear," said Fagin, drawing his chair closer. "Ha!
ha! it was lucky it was only me that heard you by chance. It was very
lucky it was only me."

"No matter who's got it, or who did it, my dear," replied Fagin,
glancing, nevertheless, with a hawk's eye at the girl and the two
bundles. "I"m in that way myself, and I like you for it."

"In that way of business," rejoined Fagin; "and so are the people of
the house. You"ve hit the right nail upon the head, and are as safe
here as you could be. There is not a safer place in all this town than
is the Cripples; that is, when I like to make it so. And I have taken
a fancy to you and the young woman; so I"ve said the word, and you may
make your minds easy."

"I'll tell you more," said Fagin, after he had reassured the girl, by
dint of friendly nods and muttered encouragements. "I have got a friend
that I think can gratify your darling wish, and put you in the right
way, where you can take whatever department of the business you think
will suit you best at first, and be taught all the others."

"What advantage would it be to me to be anything else?" inquired Fagin,
shrugging his shoulders. "Here! Let me have a word with you outside."

"Quite perfect," rejoined Fagin, clapping him on the shoulder. "You're
a genius, my dear."

"Now, what do you think?" said Fagin. "If you was to like my friend,
could you do better than join him?"

"Not a countryman among "em; and I don't think he'd take you, even on
my recommendation, if he didn't run rather short of assistants just
now," replied Fagin.

"It couldn't possibly be done without," replied Fagin, in a most
decided manner.

"Not when it's in a note you can't get rid of," retorted Fagin. "Number
and date taken, I suppose? Payment stopped at the Bank? Ah! It's not
worth much to him. It'll have to go abroad, and he couldn't sell it
for a great deal in the market."

"Live like a gentleman--board and lodging, pipes and spirits free--half
of all you earn, and half of all the young woman earns," replied Mr.
Fagin.

"A little fancy work?" suggested Fagin.

"I heard you talk of something in the spy way upon the others, my
dear," said Fagin. "My friend wants somebody who would do that well,
very much."

"What do you think of the old ladies?" asked Fagin. "There's a good
deal of money made in snatching their bags and parcels, and running
round the corner."

"Stop!" said Fagin, laying his hand on Noah's knee. "The kinchin lay."

"The kinchins, my dear," said Fagin, "is the young children that's sent
on errands by their mothers, with sixpences and shillings; and the lay
is just to take their money away--they"ve always got it ready in their
hands,--then knock "em into the kennel, and walk off very slow, as if
there were nothing else the matter but a child fallen down and hurt
itself. Ha! ha! ha!"

"To be sure it is," replied Fagin; "and you can have a few good beats
chalked out in Camden Town, and Battle Bridge, and neighborhoods like
that, where they're always going errands; and you can upset as many
kinchins as you want, any hour in the day. Ha! ha! ha!"

With this, Fagin poked Mr. Claypole in the side, and they joined in a
burst of laughter both long and loud.

"Will ten do?" asked Fagin, adding, as Mr. Claypole nodded assent,
"What name shall I tell my good friend."

"Mrs. Bolter's humble servant," said Fagin, bowing with grotesque
politeness. "I hope I shall know her better very shortly."

"She calls me Noah, as a sort of fond way of talking," said Mr. Morris
Bolter, late Claypole, turning to Fagin. "You understand?"

"Oh yes, I understand--perfectly," replied Fagin, telling the truth for
once. "Good-night! Good-night!"

With many adieus and good wishes, Mr. Fagin went his way. Noah
Claypole, bespeaking his good lady's attention, proceeded to enlighten
her relative to the arrangement he had made, with all that haughtiness
and air of superiority, becoming, not only a member of the sterner sex,
but a gentleman who appreciated the dignity of a special appointment on
the kinchin lay, in London and its vicinity.

"And so it was you that was your own friend, was it?" asked Mr.
Claypole, otherwise Bolter, when, by virtue of the compact entered into
between them, he had removed next day to Fagin's house. "Cod, I
thought as much last night!"

"Every man's his own friend, my dear," replied Fagin, with his most
insinuating grin. "He hasn't as good a one as himself anywhere."

"Don't believe that," said Fagin. "When a man's his own enemy, it's
only because he's too much his own friend; not because he's careful for
everybody but himself. Pooh! pooh! There ain't such a thing in
nature."

"In a little community like ours, my dear," said Fagin, who felt it
necessary to qualify this position, "we have a general number one,
without considering me too as the same, and all the other young people."

"You see," pursued Fagin, affecting to disregard this interruption, "we
are so mixed up together, and identified in our interests, that it must
be so. For instance, it's your object to take care of number
one--meaning yourself."

"No, I don't!" retorted Fagin. "I"m of the same importance to you, as
you are to yourself."

"Only think," said Fagin, shrugging his shoulders, and stretching out
his hands; "only consider. You"ve done what's a very pretty thing, and
what I love you for doing; but what at the same time would put the
cravat round your throat, that's so very easily tied and so very
difficult to unloose--in plain English, the halter!"

"The gallows," continued Fagin, "the gallows, my dear, is an ugly
finger-post, which points out a very short and sharp turning that has
stopped many a bold fellow's career on the broad highway. To keep in
the easy road, and keep it at a distance, is object number one with
you."

Mr. Fagin saw, with delight, that this tribute to his powers was no
mere compliment, but that he had really impressed his recruit with a
sense of his wily genius, which it was most important that he should
entertain in the outset of their acquaintance. To strengthen an
impression so desirable and useful, he followed up the blow by
acquainting him, in some detail, with the magnitude and extent of his
operations; blending truth and fiction together, as best served his
purpose; and bringing both to bear, with so much art, that Mr. Bolter's
respect visibly increased, and became tempered, at the same time, with
a degree of wholesome fear, which it was highly desirable to awaken.

"It's this mutual trust we have in each other that consoles me under
heavy losses," said Fagin. "My best hand was taken from me, yesterday
morning."

"No, no," replied Fagin, "not so bad as that. Not quite so bad."

"Wanted," interposed Fagin. "Yes, he was wanted."

"No," replied Fagin, "not very. He was charged with attempting to pick
a pocket, and they found a silver snuff-box on him,--his own, my dear,
his own, for he took snuff himself, and was very fond of it. They
remanded him till to-day, for they thought they knew the owner. Ah! he
was worth fifty boxes, and I'd give the price of as many to have him
back. You should have known the Dodger, my dear; you should have known
the Dodger."

"I"m doubtful about it," replied Fagin, with a sigh. "If they don't
get any fresh evidence, it'll only be a summary conviction, and we
shall have him back again after six weeks or so; but, if they do, it's
a case of lagging. They know what a clever lad he is; he'll be a
lifer. They'll make the Artful nothing less than a lifer."

Fagin was about to translate these mysterious expressions into the
vulgar tongue; and, being interpreted, Mr. Bolter would have been
informed that they represented that combination of words,
"transportation for life," when the dialogue was cut short by the entry
of Master Bates, with his hands in his breeches-pockets, and his face
twisted into a look of semi-comical woe.

"It's all up, Fagin," said Charley, when he and his new companion had
been made known to each other.

"They"ve found the gentleman as owns the box; two or three more's a
coming to "dentify him; and the Artful's booked for a passage out,"
replied Master Bates. "I must have a full suit of mourning, Fagin, and
a hatband, to wisit him in, afore he sets out upon his travels. To
think of Jack Dawkins--lummy Jack--the Dodger--the Artful Dodger--going
abroad for a common twopenny-halfpenny sneeze-box! I never thought
he'd a done it under a gold watch, chain, and seals, at the lowest.
Oh, why didn't he rob some rich old gentleman of all his walables, and
go out as a gentleman, and not like a common prig, without no honour
nor glory!"

"What do you talk about his having neither honour nor glory for!"
exclaimed Fagin, darting an angry look at his pupil. "Wasn't he always
the top-sawyer among you all! Is there one of you that could touch him
or come near him on any scent! Eh?"

"Then what do you talk of?" replied Fagin angrily; "what are you
blubbering for?"

"Ha! ha!" cried Fagin, extending his right hand, and turning to Mr.
Bolter in a fit of chuckling which shook him as though he had the
palsy; "see what a pride they take in their profession, my dear. Ain't
it beautiful?"

Mr. Bolter nodded assent, and Fagin, after contemplating the grief of
Charley Bates for some seconds with evident satisfaction, stepped up to
that young gentleman and patted him on the shoulder.

"Never mind, Charley," said Fagin soothingly; "it'll come out, it'll be
sure to come out. They'll all know what a clever fellow he was; he'll
show it himself, and not disgrace his old pals and teachers. Think how
young he is too! What a distinction, Charley, to be lagged at his time
of life!"

"Ay, that he shall," replied Fagin, "and we'll have a big-wig, Charley:
one that's got the greatest gift of the gab: to carry on his defence;
and he shall make a speech for himself too, if he likes; and we'll read
it all in the papers--"Artful Dodger--shrieks of laughter--here the
court was convulsed"--eh, Charley, eh?"

"Ha! ha!" laughed Master Bates, "what a lark that would be, wouldn't
it, Fagin? I say, how the Artful would bother "em wouldn't he?"

"Would!" cried Fagin. "He shall--he will!"

"So do I," cried Charley Bates. "Ha! ha! ha! so do I. I see it all
afore me, upon my soul I do, Fagin. What a game! What a regular game!
All the big-wigs trying to look solemn, and Jack Dawkins addressing of
"em as intimate and comfortable as if he was the judge's own son making
a speech arter dinner--ha! ha! ha!"

In fact, Mr. Fagin had so well humoured his young friend's eccentric
disposition, that Master Bates, who had at first been disposed to
consider the imprisoned Dodger rather in the light of a victim, now
looked upon him as the chief actor in a scene of most uncommon and
exquisite humour, and felt quite impatient for the arrival of the time
when his old companion should have so favourable an opportunity of
displaying his abilities.

"We must know how he gets on to-day, by some handy means or other,"
said Fagin. "Let me think."

"Not for the world," replied Fagin. "Are you mad, my dear, stark mad,
that you'd walk into the very place where--No, Charley, no. One is
enough to lose at a time."

"That wouldn't quite fit," replied Fagin shaking his head.

"Why, if he didn't mind--" observed Fagin.

"Really nothing, my dear," said Fagin, turning to Mr. Bolter, "really
nothing."

"Wot department has he got, Fagin?" inquired Master Bates, surveying
Noah's lank form with much disgust. "The cutting away when there's
anything wrong, and the eating all the wittles when there's everything
right; is that his branch?"

Master Bates laughed so vehemently at this magnificent threat, that it
was some time before Fagin could interpose, and represent to Mr. Bolter
that he incurred no possible danger in visiting the police-office;
that, inasmuch as no account of the little affair in which he had
engaged, nor any description of his person, had yet been forwarded to
the metropolis, it was very probable that he was not even suspected of
having resorted to it for shelter; and that, if he were properly
disguised, it would be as safe a spot for him to visit as any in
London, inasmuch as it would be, of all places, the very last, to which
he could be supposed likely to resort of his own free will.

Persuaded, in part, by these representations, but overborne in a much
greater degree by his fear of Fagin, Mr. Bolter at length consented,
with a very bad grace, to undertake the expedition. By Fagin's
directions, he immediately substituted for his own attire, a waggoner's
frock, velveteen breeches, and leather leggings: all of which articles
the Jew had at hand. He was likewise furnished with a felt hat well
garnished with turnpike tickets; and a carter's whip. Thus equipped,
he was to saunter into the office, as some country fellow from Covent
Garden market might be supposed to do for the gratification of his
curiousity; and as he was as awkward, ungainly, and raw-boned a fellow
as need be, Mr. Fagin had no fear but that he would look the part to
perfection.

The two hastened back together, to bear to Mr. Fagin the animating news
that the Dodger was doing full justice to his bringing-up, and
establishing for himself a glorious reputation.

Adept as she was, in all the arts of cunning and dissimulation, the
girl Nancy could not wholly conceal the effect which the knowledge of
the step she had taken, wrought upon her mind. She remembered that
both the crafty Jew and the brutal Sikes had confided to her schemes,
which had been hidden from all others: in the full confidence that she
was trustworthy and beyond the reach of their suspicion. Vile as those
schemes were, desperate as were their originators, and bitter as were
her feelings towards Fagin, who had led her, step by step, deeper and
deeper down into an abyss of crime and misery, whence was no escape;
still, there were times when, even towards him, she felt some
relenting, lest her disclosure should bring him within the iron grasp
he had so long eluded, and he should fall at last--richly as he merited
such a fate--by her hand.

"Ah!" replied Fagin. "What a pity, Bill, my dear, that there's none
quite ready to be done."

Fagin sighed, and shook his head despondingly.

"That's the way to talk, my dear," replied Fagin, venturing to pat him
on the shoulder. "It does me good to hear you."

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Fagin, as if he were relieved by even this
concession. "You're like yourself to-night, Bill. Quite like
yourself."

"It make you nervous, Bill,--reminds you of being nabbed, does it?"
said Fagin, determined not to be offended.

Fagin offered no reply to this compliment: but, pulling Sikes by the
sleeve, pointed his finger towards Nancy, who had taken advantage of
the foregoing conversation to put on her bonnet, and was now leaving
the room.

"Know what I"m--Oh!" cried Sikes, turning to Fagin, "she's out of her
senses, you know, or she daren't talk to me in that way."

"Tell him to let me go, Fagin. He had better. It'll be better for
him. Do you hear me?" cried Nancy stamping her foot upon the ground.

"Not till you let me go--not till you let me go--Never--never!"
screamed the girl. Sikes looked on, for a minute, watching his
opportunity, and suddenly pinioning her hands dragged her, struggling
and wrestling with him by the way, into a small room adjoining, where
he sat himself on a bench, and thrusting her into a chair, held her
down by force. She struggled and implored by turns until twelve
o"clock had struck, and then, wearied and exhausted, ceased to contest
the point any further. With a caution, backed by many oaths, to make
no more efforts to go out that night, Sikes left her to recover at
leisure and rejoined Fagin.

"You may say that, Bill," replied Fagin thoughtfully. "You may say
that."

"Worse," said Fagin thoughtfully. "I never knew her like this, for
such a little cause."

Fagin nodded an expressive approval of this mode of treatment.

Fagin nodded to him to take no further notice just then; and, in a few
minutes, the girl subsided into her accustomed demeanour. Whispering
Sikes that there was no fear of her relapsing, Fagin took up his hat
and bade him good-night. He paused when he reached the room-door, and
looking round, asked if somebody would light him down the dark stairs.

"The reason of all this," replied Fagin. "If _he_"--he pointed with
his skinny fore-finger up the stairs--"is so hard with you (he's a
brute, Nance, a brute-beast), why don't you--"

"Well?" said the girl, as Fagin paused, with his mouth almost touching
her ear, and his eyes looking into hers.

She shrank back, as Fagin offered to lay his hand on hers, but said
good-night again, in a steady voice, and, answering his parting look
with a nod of intelligence, closed the door between them.

Fagin walked towards his home, intent upon the thoughts that were
working within his brain. He had conceived the idea--not from what had
just passed though that had tended to confirm him, but slowly and by
degrees--that Nancy, wearied of the housebreaker's brutality, had
conceived an attachment for some new friend. Her altered manner, her
repeated absences from home alone, her comparative indifference to the
interests of the gang for which she had once been so zealous, and,
added to these, her desperate impatience to leave home that night at a
particular hour, all favoured the supposition, and rendered it, to him
at least, almost matter of certainty. The object of this new liking
was not among his myrmidons. He would be a valuable acquisition with
such an assistant as Nancy, and must (thus Fagin argued) be secured
without delay.

There was another, and a darker object, to be gained. Sikes knew too
much, and his ruffian taunts had not galled Fagin the less, because the
wounds were hidden. The girl must know, well, that if she shook him
off, she could never be safe from his fury, and that it would be surely
wreaked--to the maiming of limbs, or perhaps the loss of life--on the
object of her more recent fancy.

"With a little persuasion," thought Fagin, "what more likely than that
she would consent to poison him? Women have done such things, and
worse, to secure the same object before now. There would be the
dangerous villain: the man I hate: gone; another secured in his
place; and my influence over the girl, with a knowledge of this crime
to back it, unlimited."

These things passed through the mind of Fagin, during the short time he
sat alone, in the housebreaker's room; and with them uppermost in his
thoughts, he had taken the opportunity afterwards afforded him, of
sounding the girl in the broken hints he threw out at parting. There
was no expression of surprise, no assumption of an inability to
understand his meaning. The girl clearly comprehended it. Her glance
at parting showed _that_.

But perhaps she would recoil from a plot to take the life of Sikes, and
that was one of the chief ends to be attained. "How," thought Fagin, as
he crept homeward, "can I increase my influence with her? What new
power can I acquire?"

"I can," said Fagin, almost aloud. "She durst not refuse me then. Not
for her life, not for her life! I have it all. The means are ready,
and shall be set to work. I shall have you yet!"

"Bolter," said Fagin, drawing up a chair and seating himself opposite
Morris Bolter.

"You can talk as you eat, can't you?" said Fagin, cursing his dear
young friend's greediness from the very bottom of his heart.

"Out," said Fagin. "I sent her out this morning with the other young
woman, because I wanted us to be alone."

"You did well yesterday, my dear," said Fagin. "Beautiful! Six
shillings and ninepence halfpenny on the very first day! The kinchin
lay will be a fortune to you."

Fagin affected to laugh very heartily; and Mr. Bolter having had his
laugh out, took a series of large bites, which finished his first hunk
of bread and butter, and assisted himself to a second.

"I want you, Bolter," said Fagin, leaning over the table, "to do a
piece of work for me, my dear, that needs great care and caution."

"A young one," replied Fagin.

"If you do it well, a pound, my dear. One pound," said Fagin, wishing
to interest him in the scent as much as possible. "And that's what I
never gave yet, for any job of work where there wasn't valuable
consideration to be gained."

"She has found out some new friends, my dear, and I must know who they
are," replied Fagin.

"I knew you would be," cried Fagin, elated by the success of his
proposal.

"All that, my dear, you shall hear from me. I'll point her out at the
proper time," said Fagin. "You keep ready, and leave the rest to me."

That night, and the next, and the next again, the spy sat booted and
equipped in his carter's dress: ready to turn out at a word from
Fagin. Six nights passed--six long weary nights--and on each, Fagin
came home with a disappointed face, and briefly intimated that it was
not yet time. On the seventh, he returned earlier, and with an
exultation he could not conceal. It was Sunday.

"She goes abroad to-night," said Fagin, "and on the right errand, I"m
sure; for she has been alone all day, and the man she is afraid of will
not be back much before daybreak. Come with me. Quick!"

It was past eleven o"clock, and the door was closed. It opened softly
on its hinges as Fagin gave a low whistle. They entered, without noise;
and the door was closed behind them.

Scarcely venturing to whisper, but substituting dumb show for words,
Fagin, and the young Jew who had admitted them, pointed out the pane of
glass to Noah, and signed to him to climb up and observe the person in
the adjoining room.

Fagin nodded yes.

"Stay there," whispered Fagin. He signed to Barney, who withdrew. In
an instant, the lad entered the room adjoining, and, under pretence of
snuffing the candle, moved it in the required position, and, speaking
to the girl, caused her to raise her face.

He hastily descended, as the room-door opened, and the girl came out.
Fagin drew him behind a small partition which was curtained off, and
they held their breaths as she passed within a few feet of their place
of concealment, and emerged by the door at which they had entered.

Noah exchanged a look with Fagin, and darted out.

"Fagin," cried the girl, recoiling.

"Then," pursued the gentleman, "this Fagin shall not be brought to
justice without your consent. In such a case I could show you reasons,
I think, which would induce you to yield it."

It was nearly two hours before day-break; that time which in the autumn
of the year, may be truly called the dead of night; when the streets
are silent and deserted; when even sounds appear to slumber, and
profligacy and riot have staggered home to dream; it was at this still
and silent hour, that Fagin sat watching in his old lair, with face so
distorted and pale, and eyes so red and blood-shot, that he looked less
like a man, than like some hideous phantom, moist from the grave, and
worried by an evil spirit.

Indeed they were. Mortification at the overthrow of his notable
scheme; hatred of the girl who had dared to palter with strangers; and
utter distrust of the sincerity of her refusal to yield him up; bitter
disappointment at the loss of his revenge on Sikes; the fear of
detection, and ruin, and death; and a fierce and deadly rage kindled by
all; these were the passionate considerations which, following close
upon each other with rapid and ceaseless whirl, shot through the brain
of Fagin, as every evil thought and blackest purpose lay working at his
heart.

Fagin laid his hand upon the bundle, and locking it in the cupboard,
sat down again without speaking. But he did not take his eyes off the
robber, for an instant, during this action; and now that they sat over
against each other, face to face, he looked fixedly at him, with his
lips quivering so violently, and his face so altered by the emotions
which had mastered him, that the housebreaker involuntarily drew back
his chair, and surveyed him with a look of real affright.

Fagin raised his right hand, and shook his trembling forefinger in the
air; but his passion was so great, that the power of speech was for the
moment gone.

"No, no," rejoined Fagin, finding his voice. "It's not--you're not the
person, Bill. I"ve no--no fault to find with you."

"I"ve got that to tell you, Bill," said Fagin, drawing his chair
nearer, "will make you worse than me."

"Lost!" cried Fagin. "She has pretty well settled that, in her own
mind, already."

"Suppose that lad that's laying there--" Fagin began.

"Suppose that lad," pursued Fagin, "was to peach--to blow upon us
all--first seeking out the right folks for the purpose, and then having
a meeting with "em in the street to paint our likenesses, describe
every mark that they might know us by, and the crib where we might be
most easily taken. Suppose he was to do all this, and besides to blow
upon a plant we"ve all been in, more or less--of his own fancy; not
grabbed, trapped, tried, earwigged by the parson and brought to it on
bread and water,--but of his own fancy; to please his own taste;
stealing out at nights to find those most interested against us, and
peaching to them. Do you hear me?" cried the Jew, his eyes flashing
with rage. "Suppose he did all this, what then?"

"What if I did it!" cried Fagin almost in a yell. "I, that knows so
much, and could hang so many besides myself!"

Fagin looked hard at the robber; and, motioning him to be silent,
stooped over the bed upon the floor, and shook the sleeper to rouse
him. Sikes leant forward in his chair: looking on with his hands upon
his knees, as if wondering much what all this questioning and
preparation was to end in.

"Bolter, Bolter! Poor lad!" said Fagin, looking up with an expression
of devilish anticipation, and speaking slowly and with marked emphasis.
"He's tired--tired with watching for her so long,--watching for _her_,
Bill."

Fagin made no answer, but bending over the sleeper again, hauled him
into a sitting posture. When his assumed name had been repeated
several times, Noah rubbed his eyes, and, giving a heavy yawn, looked
sleepily about him.

"That about-- _Nancy_," said Fagin, clutching Sikes by the wrist, as if
to prevent his leaving the house before he had heard enough. "You
followed her?"

"A gentleman and a lady that she had gone to of her own accord before,
who asked her to give up all her pals, and Monks first, which she
did--and to describe him, which she did--and to tell her what house it
was that we meet at, and go to, which she did--and where it could be
best watched from, which she did--and what time the people went there,
which she did. She did all this. She told it all every word without a
threat, without a murmur--she did--did she not?" cried Fagin, half mad
with fury.

"Again. Tell it again!" cried Fagin, tightening his grasp on Sikes,
and brandishing his other hand aloft, as the foam flew from his lips.

"What more of him?" cried Fagin. "What more of the man she had told
them of before? Tell him that, tell him that."

"Bill, Bill!" cried Fagin, following him hastily. "A word. Only a
word."

"Hear me speak a word," rejoined Fagin, laying his hand upon the lock.
"You won't be--"

"I mean," said Fagin, showing that he felt all disguise was now
useless, "not too violent for safety. Be crafty, Bill, and not too
bold."

Sikes made no reply; but, pulling open the door, of which Fagin had
turned the lock, dashed into the silent streets.

"There's somebody to speak to there, at all event," he thought. "A good
hiding-place, too. They'll never expect to nab me there, after this
country scent. Why can't I lie by for a week or so, and, forcing blunt
from Fagin, get abroad to France? Damme, I'll risk it."

"Fagin," said Mr. Brownlow; "what of him?"

"When was Fagin took then?"

"The sessions are on," said Kags: "if they get the inquest over, and
Bolter turns King's evidence: as of course he will, from what he's
said already: they can prove Fagin an accessory before the fact, and
get the trial on on Friday, and he'll swing in six days from this, by
G--!"

"To-night's paper says that Fagin's took. Is it true, or a lie?"

At length, when nine o"clock had come, and they began to think they
were to hear no more that night, Mr. Losberne and Mr. Grimwig entered
the room, followed by Mr. Brownlow and a man whom Oliver almost
shrieked with surprise to see; for they told him it was his brother,
and it was the same man he had met at the market-town, and seen looking
in with Fagin at the window of his little room. Monks cast a look of
hate, which, even then, he could not dissemble, at the astonished boy,
and sat down near the door. Mr. Brownlow, who had papers in his hand,
walked to a table near which Rose and Oliver were seated.

The court was paved, from floor to roof, with human faces. Inquisitive
and eager eyes peered from every inch of space. From the rail before
the dock, away into the sharpest angle of the smallest corner in the
galleries, all looks were fixed upon one man--Fagin. Before him and
behind: above, below, on the right and on the left: he seemed to
stand surrounded by a firmament, all bright with gleaming eyes.

"Take him away to bed!" cried Fagin. "Do you hear me, some of you? He
has been the--the--somehow the cause of all this. It's worth the money
to bring him up to it--Bolter's throat, Bill; never mind the
girl--Bolter's throat as deep as you can cut. Saw his head off!"

"Fagin," said the jailer.

"Here," said the turnkey, laying his hand upon his breast to keep him
down. "Here's somebody wants to see you, to ask you some questions, I
suppose. Fagin, Fagin! Are you a man?"

"It's all a lie together," replied Fagin. "I haven't one--not one."

"Oliver," cried Fagin, beckoning to him. "Here, here! Let me whisper
to you."

"The papers," said Fagin, drawing Oliver towards him, "are in a canvas
bag, in a hole a little way up the chimney in the top front-room. I
want to talk to you, my dear. I want to talk to you."

"Outside, outside," replied Fagin, pushing the boy before him towards
the door, and looking vacantly over his head. "Say I"ve gone to
sleep--they'll believe you. You can get me out, if you take me so.
Now then, now then!"

"That's right, that's right," said Fagin. "That'll help us on. This
door first. If I shake and tremble, as we pass the gallows, don't you
mind, but hurry on. Now, now, now!"

"Press on, press on," cried Fagin. "Softly, but not so slow. Faster,
faster!"

Monks, still bearing that assumed name, retired with his portion to a
distant part of the New World; where, having quickly squandered it, he
once more fell into his old courses, and, after undergoing a long
confinement for some fresh act of fraud and knavery, at length sunk
under an attack of his old disorder, and died in prison. As far from
home, died the chief remaining members of his friend Fagin's gang.

Mr. Noah Claypole: receiving a free pardon from the Crown in
consequence of being admitted approver against Fagin: and considering
his profession not altogether as safe a one as he could wish: was, for
some little time, at a loss for the means of a livelihood, not burdened
with too much work. After some consideration, he went into business as
an Informer, in which calling he realises a genteel subsistence. His
plan is, to walk out once a week during church time attended by
Charlotte in respectable attire. The lady faints away at the doors of
charitable publicans, and the gentleman being accommodated with
three-penny worth of brandy to restore her, lays an information next
day, and pockets half the penalty. Sometimes Mr. Claypole faints
himself, but the result is the same.

