This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its pages a
reader may discover much of their character and a little of their history.
Further information will also be found in the selection from the Red Book of
Westmarch that has already been published, under the title of The Hobbit.
That story was derived from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed
by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become famous in the world at large,
and called by him There and Back Again, since they told of his journey into
the East and his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits
in the great events of that Age that are here related.

It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits are
relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of old
they spoke the languages of Men, after their own fashion, and liked and
disliked much the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship
is can no longer be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in
the Elder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves still
preserve any records of that vanished time, and their traditions are
concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom
and Hobbits are not mentioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in
fact, lived quietly in Middle-earth for many long years before other folk
became even aware of them. And the world being after all full of strange
creatures beyond count, these little people seemed of very little
importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly
became, by no wish of their own, both important and renowned, and troubled

Those days, the Third Age of Middle -earth, are now long past, and the
shape of all lands has been changed; but the regions in which Hobbits then
lived were doubtless the same as those in which they still linger: the
North-West of the Old World, east of the Sea. Of their original home the
Hobbits in Bilbo's time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning (other
than genealogical lore) was far from general among them, but there remained
still a few in the older families who studied their own books, and even
gathered reports of old times and distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and
Men. Their own records began only after the settlement of the Shire, and
their most ancient legends hardly looked further back than their Wandering
Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of
their peculiar words and customs, that like many other folk Hobbits had in
the distant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time
when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between the eaves of
Greenwood

The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They were
more friendly with Elves than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill in
language and song than in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to
tilling. They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came down the
River Hoarwell. In Eriador they soon mingled with the other kinds that had
preceded them, but being somewhat bolder and more adventurous, they were
often found as leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even
in Bilbo's time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the
greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland.

In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains and the
Mountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a remnant
still dwelt there of the D®nedain, the kings of Men that came over the Sea
out of Westernesse; but they were dwindling fast and the lands of their
North Kingdom were falling far and wide into waste. There was room and to
spare for incomers, and ere long the Hobbits began to settle in ordered
communities. Most of their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been
forgotten in Bilbo's time; but one of the first to become important still
endured, though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood that
lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire.

fought among themselves. In olden days they had, of course, been often
obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's time
that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and
indeed the only one that had ever been fought within the borders of the
Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in
which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Ores. Even the weathers had
grown

All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or so they
believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at home; but in the
course of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of abode. Actually
in the Shire in Bilbo's days it was, as a rule, only the richest and the
poorest Hobbits that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on living
in burrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed, with only one
window or none; while the well-to-do still constructed more luxurious
versions of the simple diggings of old. But suitable sites for these large
and ramifying tunnels (or smicils as they called them) were not everywhere to
be found; and in the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, as they

The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large, and
inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors very
exceptional, as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendship
with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or
the Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relatives lived in
(comparative) peace together in one ancestral and many -tunnelled mansion.
All Hobbits were, in any case, clannish and reckoned up their relationships
with great care. They drew long and elaborate family -trees with innumerable
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who is related
to whom, and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out
a family -tree that included even the more important members of the more
important families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical
trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small book in
themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them exceedingly dull. Hobbits
delighted in such things, if they were accurate: they liked to have books
filled with things that they already knew, set out fair and square with no
contradictions.

At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they were called,
had been greatly increased. There were many reports and complaints of
strange persons and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the
first sign that all was not quite as it should be, and always had been
except in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even
Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty years had passed since
he set out on his memorable journey, and he was old even for Hobbits, who
reached a hundred as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the
considerable wealth that he had brought back. How much or how little he
revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favourite 'nephew'. And he still
kept secret the ring that he bad found.

As is told in The Hobbit , there came one day to Bilbo's door the great
Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed,
than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and his twelve companions in
exile. With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning
of April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great
treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor
in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon that
guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle
of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of renown
were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned
more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an 'accident'
by the way. The party was assailed by Ores in a high pass of the Misty
Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was
lost for a while in the black ore-mines deep under the mountains, and there,
as he groped in vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the
floor of a tunnel. Ele put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck.

Trying to find his way out. Bilbo went on down to the roots of the
mountains, until he could go no further. At the bottom of the tunnel lay a
cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the water lived
Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his
large flat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catching blind fish
with his long fingers, and eating them raw. He ate any living thing, even
ore, if he could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a
secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in
the light: a ring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the one
thing he loved, his 'precious', and he talked to it, even when it was not
with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he
was hunting or spying on the ores of the mines.

Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been on him
when they met; but it was not, and the hobbit held in his hand an Elvish
knife, which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo
to the Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo could not

guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then
he would do as Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.

Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor
back. Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another many riddles.
In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for
he was stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his hand came
upon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten: What haw I got in my pocket?
This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses.

The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question was a
mere 'question' and not a 'riddle' according to the strict rules of the
Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer,
Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word;
for

the thought came to him that this slimy creature might prove false, even
though such promises were held sacred, and of old all but the wickedest
things feared to break them. But after ages alone in the dark Gollum's heart
was black, and treachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to the
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, not far off in the dark water. There,
he thought, lay his ring. He was hungry now, and angry, and once his
'precious' was with him he would not fear any weapon at all.

But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was gone. His
screech sent a shiver down Bilbo's back, though he did not yet understand
what had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What
has it got in its pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a
green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his 'precious'.
Just in time Bilbo saw his peril, and he fled blindly up the passage away
from the water; and once more he was saved by his luck. For just as he ran
he put his hand in his pocket, and the ring slipped quietly on to his
finger. So it was that Gollum passed him without seeing him, and went to
guard the way out, lest the 'thief should escape. Warily Bilbo followed
him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about his 'precious';
from which talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth, and hope came to him
in the darkness: he himself had found the marvellous ring and a chance of
escape from the ores and from Gollum.

At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to the
lower gates of the mines, on the eastward side of the mountains. There
Gollum crouched at bay, smelling and listening; and Bilbo was tempted to

Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told
it to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had promised to
give him a present, if he won the game; but when Gollum went to fetch it
from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the very
ring that he had found, and as he had won the game, it was already his by
right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum
show him the way out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the
original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts. But
many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived no doubt
from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually written by the old
hobbit himself.

Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo's first story, as soon as he heard
it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got
the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while
strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth
important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important,
and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the
first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a 'present' was not mere
hobbitlike invention, all the same. It was suggested to Bilbo, as he
confessed, by Gollum's talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call
the ring his 'birthday present', many times. That also Gandalf thought
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in this point for
many more years, as will be seen in this book.

Of Bilbo's later adventures little more need be said here. With the
help of the ring he escaped from the ore-guards at the gate and rejoined his
companions. He used the ring many times on his quest, chiefly for the help
of his friends; but he kept it secret from them as long as he could. After

His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his fireplace, and his coat of
marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon -hoard, he lent to a
museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer
at Bag End the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the
ring, secured by a fine chain, remained in his pocket.

the history of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long
preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns, Wardens of the
Westmarch. 1 It was in origin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with him
to Rivendell. Frodo brought it back to the Shire, together with many loose
leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages with his
account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, probably m a
single red case, were the three large volumes, bound in red leather, that
Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift. To these four volumes there was added
in Westmarch a fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship.

The Thain’s Book was thus the first copy made of the Red Book and
contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received
much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words, and
quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated
version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside
the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have been written by
Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the
King. But the chief importance of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains
the whole of Bilbo's ’Translations from the Elvish'. These three volumes
were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between 1403
and 1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both
living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost
entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here.

When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he would shortly be
celebrating his eleventy -first birthday with a party of special
magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton.

Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the wonder of the
Shire for sixty years, ever since his remarkable disappearance and
unexpected return. The riches he had brought back from his travels had now
become a local legend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk
might say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with
treasure. And if that was not enough for fame, there was also his prolonged
vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it seemed to have little effect on
Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they
began to call him we//-preserved, but unchanged would have been nearer the
mark. There were some that shook their heads and thought this was too much
of a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should possess (apparently)
perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.

The eldest of these, and Bilbo's favourite, was young Frodo Baggins.
When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to
live at Bag End; and the hopes of the Sackville-Bagginses were finally
dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same birthday, September
22nd.

"You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad," said Bilbo one day; 'and
then we can celebrate our birthday-parties comfortably together." At that

Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given very lively
combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but now it was understood that
something quite exceptional was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was
going to be eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious number and a very
respectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130);
and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33) an important number: the date of
his 'coming of age'.

Tongues began to wag in Flobbiton and By water; and rumour of the coming
event travelled all over the Shire. The history and character of Mr. Bilbo
Baggins became once again the chief topic of conversation; and the older
folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.

No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly
known as the Gaffer. He held forth at The Ivy Bush , a small inn on the
Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden
at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before
that. Now that he was himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job
was mainly carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son
were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.

’A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I've always
said," the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite to
him, calling him "Master Hamfast', and consulting him constantly upon the
growing of vegetables - in the matter of 'roots', especially potatoes, the
Gaffer was recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbourhood
(including himself).

fool about with boats on that big river - and that isn’t natural. Small
wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is
as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo,
and in more than looks. After all his father was a Baggins. A decent
respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins; there was never much to tell of
him, till he was drownded."

Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest
of the Old Took's daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So Mr.
Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying
is, if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Flail with his
father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (him
being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous
table); and he went out boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. '

"You shouldn't listen to all you hear, Sandyman," said the Gaffer, who
did not much like the miller. "There isn't no call to go talking of pushing
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit still without
looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo
left an orphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queer
Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than a couple of hundred
relations in the place. Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he
brought the lad back to live among decent folk.

"Then you've heard more than I can speak to," answered the Gaffer. I
know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and there seems
no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel -making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came
back, a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I'd not long come
prentice to old Holman (him being my dad's cousin), but he had me up at Bag
End helping him to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the
garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up
the Hill with a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I
don't doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn't enough
to fill tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that. He's in and out
of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days he is, and he listens to all
Mr. Bilbo's tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters - meaning no harm,
mark you, and I hope no harm will come of it.

But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend of Bilbo's
wealth was now too firmly fixed in the minds of the younger generation of
hobbits.

It was driven by outlandish folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End. At the end of the
second week in September a cart came in through Bywater from the direction
of the Brandywine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all
alone. He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and a silver
scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond
the brim of his hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through
Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly
guessed. At Bilbo's front door the old man began to unload: there were great
bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red
G and the elf-rune, .

When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, had finished
unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or cracker
was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers.

"Run away now!" said Gandalf. "You will get plenty when the time
comes." Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door was shut. The
young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and then made off,

Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window of a
small room looking out west on to the garden. The late afternoon was bright
and peaceful. The flowers glowed red and golden: snap-dragons and
sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in
at the round windows.

"Yes," said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old
Shire; but I think I need a holiday."

"We shall see," said Bilbo.

BUSINESS. Even those who had, or pretended to have Party Business were
seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking off
answers, packing up presents, and making some private preparations of his
own. From the time of Gandalf s arrival he remained hidden from view.

One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field, south of Bilbo's

Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety of
entertainments rolled into one. Practically everybody living near was
invited. A very few were overlooked by accident, but as they turned up all
the same, that did not matter. Many people from other parts of the Shire
were also asked; and there were even a few from outside the borders. Bilbo
met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. Ele gave away
presents to all and sundry - the latter were those who went out again by a
back way and came in again by the gate. Hobbits give presents to other
people on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not
so lavishly as on this occasion; but it was not a bad system. Actually in
Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year it was somebody’s birthday, so
that every hobbit in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present
at least once a week. But they never got tired of them.

There were rockets like a flight of scintillating birds singing with
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves
opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches
dropped glowing flowers down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with
a sweet scent just before they touched their upturned faces. There were
fountains of butterflies that flew glittering into the trees; there were
pillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into eagles, or sailing
ships, or a phalanx of flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a
shower of yellow rain; there was a forest of silver spears that sprang
suddenly into the air with a yell like an embattled army, and came down
again into the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And there was
also one last surprise, in honour of Bilbo, and it startled the hobbits
exceedingly, as Gandalf intended. The lights went out. A great smoke went
up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow
at the summit. It spouted green and scarlet flames. Out flew a red -golden
dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his
eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzed three times over the
heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell flat on their faces. The
dragon passed like an express train, turned a somersault, and burst over
Bywater with a deafening explosion.

That is the signal for supper!" said Bilbo. The pain and alarm
vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to their feet. There was
a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that is, except those invited
to the special family dinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with
the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called

by the hobbits one Gross, though the word was not considered proper to use
of people); and the guests were selected from all the families to which
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with the addition of a few special unrelated
friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and present by
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the
matter of sitting up late, especially when there was a chance of getting
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.

There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many Tooks and
Brandybucks; there were various Grubbs (relations of Bilbo Baggins'
grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and
selection of Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies,
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly
connected

with Bilbo, and some of them had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before, as
they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were not
forgotten. Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and
detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in
golden ink, that they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides, their
cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing in food for many years and his table
had a high reputation.

All the one hundred and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast;
though they rather dreaded the after-dinner speech of their host (an
inevitable item). Fie was liable to drag in bits of what he called poetry;
and sometimes, after a glass or two, would allude to the absurd adventures
of his mysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied,
and prolonged. The purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout
the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had depleted the
stocks of most stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not
matter much.

My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in his place. ’Flear! Flear! Hear!’
they shouted, and kept on repeating it in chorus, seeming reluctant to

follow their own advice. Bilbo left his place and went and stood on a chair
under the illuminated tree. The light of the lanterns fell on his beaming
face; the golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could
all see him standing, waving one hand in the air, the other was in his
trouser -pocket.

Proudfoots, repeated Bilbo. Also my good Sackville-Bagginses that I
welcome back at last to Bag End. Today is my one hundred and eleventh
birthday: I am eleventy -one today!" Hurray! Hurray! Many Happy Returns!"
they shouted, and they hammered joyously on the tables. Bilbo was doing
splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.

hobbits, but they all agreed they were marvellous crackers. They contained
instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one
corner some of the young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo to
have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up
an impromptu orchestra, and began a merry dance-tune. Master Everard Took
and Miss Melilot Brandybuck got on a table and with bells in their hands
began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous.

But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster near by, he
blew three loud hoots. The noise subsided. / shall not keep you long, he
cried. Cheers from all the assembly. / have called you all together for a
Purpose. Something in the way that he said this made an impression. There
was almost silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears.

It is also, if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, the
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the
fact that it was my birthday slipped my memory on that occasion. I was only
fifty-one then, and birthdays did not seem so important. The banquet was
very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and
could only say 'thagyou very buch'. I now repeat it more correctly: Thank
you very much for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence. They all
feared that a song or some poetry was now imminent; and they were getting
bored. Why couldn't he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo
did not sing or recite. Fie paused for a moment.

He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and
the guests all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be
seen. One hundred and forty-four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless.

It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste, and more
food and drink were needed to cure the guests of shock and annoyance. "He's
mad. I always said so," was probably the most popular comment. Even the
Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought Bilbo’s behaviour was absurd. For the
moment most of them took it for granted that his disappearance was nothing
more than a ridiculous prank.

Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time he
had sat silent beside Bilbo's empty chair, and ignored all remarks and
questions. He had enjoyed the joke, of course, even though he had been in
the know. He had difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant
surprise of the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled: he
realized suddenly that he loved the old hobbit dearly. Most of the guests
went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins' oddities, past and
present; but the Sackville-Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo
did not want to have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for more
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass silently to the
health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion.

As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech, he had been
fingering the golden ring in his pocket: his magic ring that he had kept
secret for so many years. As he stepped down he slipped it on his finger,
and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again.

"Hullo!" said Bilbo. "I wondered if you would turn up."

"Yes, I do," said Bilbo. "Though that flash was surprising: it quite
startled me, let alone the others. A little addition of your own, I
suppose?"

"And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody," laughed
Bilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual."

"Well, er, yes, I suppose so," stammered Bilbo.

"In an envelope, if you must know," said Bilbo impatiently. "There on
the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my pocket!" He hesitated. "Isn't
that odd now?" he said softly to himself. "Yet after all, why not? Why
shouldn't it stay there?"

Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his
eyes. "I think, Bilbo," he said quietly, "I should leave it behind. Don't
you want to?"

"No, but I had to badger you," said Gandalf. "I wanted the truth. It
was important. Magic rings are - well, magical; and they are rare and
curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may say; and I
still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also
I think you have had it quite long enough. You won't need it any more.
Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken."

Bilbo flushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His kindly
face grew hard. "Why not?" he cried. "And what business is it of yours,
anyway, to know what I do with my own things? It is my own. I found it. It
came to me."

"If I am it is your fault," said Bilbo. "It is mine, I tell you. My
own. My precious. Yes, my precious."

Bilbo," he said. "You make that clearer with every word you say. It has got
far too much hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go yourself, and be
free."

"I'll do as I choose and go as I please," said Bilbo obstinately.

"Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!" cried Bilbo. "But you
won't get it. I won't give my precious away, I tell you." His hand strayed
to the hilt of his small sword.

Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand clutching at

Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. I am sorry," he said. "But I felt so
queer. And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with it any
more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was
like an eye looking at me. And I am always wanting to put it on and
disappear, don't you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to
make sure. I tried locking it up, but I found I couldn't rest without it in
my pocket. I don't know why. And I don't seem able to make up my mind."

Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. "All
right," he said with an effort. I will." Then he shrugged his shoulders, and
smiled rather ruefully. "After all that's what this party business was all
about, really: to give away lots of birthday presents, and somehow make it
easier to give it away at the same time. It hasn't made it any easier in the
end, but it would be a pity to waste all my preparations. It would quite
spoil the joke."

"Very well," said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo with all the rest." He drew
a deep breath. "And now I really must be starting, or somebody else will
catch me. I have said good-bye, and I couldn't bear to do it all over
again." He picked up his bag and moved to the door.

"You have still got the ring in your pocket," said the wizard. "Well,
so I have!" cried Bilbo. "And my will and all the other documents too. You
had better take it and deliver it for me. That will be safest."

Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to set it by the
clock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on the floor. Before he
could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and set it in its place.

They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favourite stick from the
stand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out of different rooms where
they had been busy.

"Is everything ready?" asked Bilbo. "Everything packed and labelled?"

"Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself! You are old
enough, and perhaps wise enough."

Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness.
’Goodbye, my dear Bilbo - until our next meeting!" he said softly and went
back indoors.

Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired and
worried. He welcomed all the callers, but he had not much more to say than
before. His reply to all inquiries was simply this: "Mr. Bilbo Baggins has
gone away; as far as I know, for good." Some of the visitors he invited to
come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them.

For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo, on an umbrella.
Adelard

Bilbo, on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo's sister and the eldest
surviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had
written reams of good advice for more than half a century.

For ANGELICA"S use, from Uncle Bilbo, on a round convex mirror. She
was

spoons. Bilbo believed that she had acquired a good many of his spoons,
while he was away on his former journey. Fobelia knew that quite well. When
she arrived later in the day, she took the point at once, but she also took
the spoons.

This is only a small selection of the assembled presents. Bilbo's
residence had got rather cluttered up with things in the course of his long

life. It was a tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for which the
custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible. Not, of
course, that the birthday-presents were always new, there were one or two
old mathoms of forgotten uses that had circulated all around the district;
but Bilbo had usually given new presents, and kept those that he received.
The old hole was now being cleared a little.

Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written out
personally by Bilbo, and several had some point, or some joke. But, of
course, most of the things were given where they would be wanted and
welcome. The poorer hobbits, and especially those of Bagshot Row, did very
well. Old Gaffer Gamgee got two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a woollen
waistcoat, and a bottle of ointment for creaking joints. Old Rory
Brandybuck, in return for much hospitality, got a dozen bottles of Old
Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as
it had been laid down by Bilbo's father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted
him a capital fellow after the first bottle.

The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began by offering
him bad bargain-prices (as between friends) for various valuable and
unlabelled things. When Frodo replied that only the things specially
directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very
fishy.

Otho would have been Bilbo's heir, but for the adoption of Frodo. He
read the will carefully and snorted. It was, unfortunately, very clear and
correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other
things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink).

Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits (two
Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking holes in the walls of one of the
cellars. Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho Proudfoot (old Odo
Proudfoot's grandson), who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry,
where he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both
curiosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously obtained, if not
positively ill-gotten), is, as every one knows, any one's for the finding

"She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo's
ring. I longed to disappear."

"Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and
how he used it: on his journey, I mean."

"If you mean, inventing all that about a "present", well, I thought the
true story much more likely, and I couldn't see the point of altering it at
all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do so, anyway; and I thought it rather
odd."

"I did mean to - but I have had to change my mind. I may be away for a
good while; but I'll come and see you again, as soon as I can. Expect me
when you see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan't often be visiting the
Shire openly again. I find that I have become rather unpopular. They say I
am a nuisance and a disturber of the peace. Some people are actually
accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is
supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth."

"Some people!" exclaimed Frodo. "You mean Otho and Lobelia. How
abominable! I would give them Bag End and everything else, if I could get
Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country with him. I love the Shire.
But I begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever
see him again."

The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety -nine days. The second
disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all
over the Shire, for a year and a day, and was remembered much longer than
that. It became a fireside -story for young hobbits; and eventually Mad
Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash and reappear with bags
of jewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on long
after all the true events were forgotten.

But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood was that
Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone quite mad, and
had run off into the Blue. There he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a
river and come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame was
mostly laid on Gandalf.

"If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps
he'll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense," they said. And to all
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the
growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to
carry on Bilbo's reputation for oddity. He refused to go into mourning; and
the next year he gave a party in honour of Bilbo's hundred-and-twelfth
birthday, which he called Hundred-weight Feast. But that was short of the
mark, for twenty guests were invited and there were several meals at which
it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say.

Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving
Bilbo's Birthday Party year after year until they got used to it. He said
that he did not think Bilbo was dead. When they asked: "Where is he then?"
he shrugged his shoulders.

He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many friends,
especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the Old Took)
who had as children been fond of Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End.
Folco Boffin and Fredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real
name was Meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping
all

the hills and woods under the starlight. Merry and Pippin suspected that he
visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had done.

Frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own master
and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For some years he was
quite happy and did not worry much about the future. But half unknown to
himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He
found himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about the wild
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his
dreams. He began to say to himself: "Perhaps I shall cross the River myself
one day." To which the other half of his mind always replied: "Not yet."

So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his fiftieth
birthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that he felt was somehow
significant (or ominous); it was at any rate at that age that adventure had
suddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths
seemed too well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay beyond
their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly white spaces beyond its
borders. He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and
Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking
and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in
the Shire.

"Well I don't know," said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had once
seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day. Of all the
legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments of tales and
half-remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always
moved him most deeply. "There are some, even in these parts, as know the
Fair Folk and get news of them," he said. "There's Mr. Baggins now, that I
work for. He told me that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves.
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more: many's the talk I had with him when I was a
little lad."

"Oh, they're both cracked," said Ted. "Leastways old Bilbo was cracked,
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where you get your news from, you'll never

Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when
Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps

"How long have you known this?" asked Frodo at length. "And how much
did Bilbo know?"

"Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure," said Gandalf. "He
would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he thought would
be a danger, even though I promised to look after you. He thought the ring
was very beautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong or

"Very wise," said Gandalf. "But as for his long life, Bilbo never
connected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit for that to
himself, and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and
uneasy. Thin and stretched he said. A sign that the ring was getting
control."

"Let me see - it was in the year that the White Council drove the dark power
from Mirkwood, just before the Battle of Five Armies, that Bilbo found his
ring. A shadow fell on my heart then, though I did not know yet what I
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring, as plainly it was
- that at least was clear from the first. Then I heard Bilbo's strange story
of how he had "won" it, and I could not believe it. When I at last got the
truth out of him, I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to
the ring beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his "birthday present". The
lies were too much alike for my comfort. Clearly the ring had an unwholesome
power that set to work on its keeper at once. That was the first real
warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. There was little
else that I could do. I could not take it from him without doing greater
harm; and I had no right to do so anyway. I could only watch and wait. I
might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White, but something always held
me
back."

"And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed. Yes, they
passed, and they seemed not to touch him. He showed no signs of age. The
shadow fell on me again. But I said to myself: "After all he comes of a
long-lived family on his mother's side. There is time yet. Wait!"

"He felt better at once," said Gandalf. "But there is only one Power in
this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I
know there is no Power in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the
Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of
knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be, and yet
sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I think it likely that some would
resist the Rings far longer than most of the Wise would believe. I don't
think you need worry about Bilbo.

"Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used it, so it
might take a long while for the influence to wear off - before it was safe
for him to see it again, for instance. Otherwise, he might live on for
years, quite happily: just stop as he was when he parted with it. For he
gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I was not
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the thing go. It is for
you that I feel responsible.

"Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you, and
about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. It would be a grievous
blow to the world, if the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all your kind,
jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not
to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved."

"Revenge?" said Frodo. "Revenge for what? I still don't understand what
all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring."

"Gollum!" cried Frodo. "Gollum? Do you mean that this is the very
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!"

"It is true all the same," replied Gandalf. "About their origins, at
any rate, I know more than hobbits do themselves. And even Bilbo's story
suggests the kinship. There was a great deal in the background of their
minds and memories that was very similar. They understood one another
remarkably well, very much better than a hobbit would understand, say, a
Dwarf, or an Ore, or even an Elf. Think of the riddles they both knew, for
one thing."

"Yes," said Frodo. "Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and
of much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat. Gollum meant to cheat all
the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo off his guard. And I daresay
it amused his wickedness to start a game which might end in providing him
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him."

"A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. It may slip off
treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he plays with the
idea of handing it on to someone else's care - and that only at an early
stage, when it first begins to grip. But as far as I know Bilbo alone in
history has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. He needed all my
help, too. And even so he would never have just forsaken it, or cast it
aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided things.

"What, just in time to meet Bilbo?" said Frodo. "Wouldn't an Ore have
suited it better?"

"It is no laughing matter," said Gandalf. "Not for you. It was the
strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far: Bilbo's arrival
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark.

picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire!

"Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the
Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was meant to
find the Ring, and not by its maker. In which case you also were meant to
have it. And that maybe an encouraging thought."

"Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?"

I endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desperately
important, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put the fear of fire on him,
and wrung the true story out of him, bit by bit, together with much
snivelling and snarling. He thought he was misunderstood and ill-used. But
when he had at last told me his history, as far as the end of the
Riddle-game and Bilbo's escape, he would not say any more, except in dark
hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He muttered that he was
going to gel his own back. People would see if he would stand being kicked,
and driven into a hole and then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good
friends and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay for it. That
was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What is more, he
knew where he came from."

"Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum himself; and
after that it would not be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum
came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than
his fear of the Ores, or even of the light. After a year or two he left the
mountains. You see, though still bound by desire of it, the Ring was no
longer devouring him; he began to revive a little. He felt old, terribly
old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry.

"I saw him there," answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered
far, following Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to learn anything from him

’That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I had
weary days of it. But from hints dropped among the snarls I even gathered
that his padding feet had taken him at last to Esgaroth, and even to the
streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great
events went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name and
knew where he came from. We had made no secret of our return journey to his
home in the West. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted."

"Then why didn't he track Bilbo further?" asked Frodo. "Why didn't he
come to the Shire?"

"Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark and
dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilbo
left here. And my search would have been in vain, but for the help that I
had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age
of the world. Together we sought for Gollum down the whole length of
Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given
up the chase and turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned

"But this is terrible!" cried Frodo. "Far worse than the worst that I
imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I
to do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!"

"Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some
that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager to
deal out death in judgement. For even the very wise cannot see all ends. I
have not much hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, but there is a
chance of it. And he is bound up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells
me that he has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and
when that comes, the pity of Bilbo may rule the fate of many - yours not
least. In any case we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched.

"All the same," said Frodo, 'even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I
wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had
not got it! Why did you let me keep it? Why didn't you make me throw it
away, or, or destroy it?"

"Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that
as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo's or better, ending
in peace. But this would mean exile, a flight from danger into danger,
drawing it after me. And I suppose I must go alone, if I am to do that and
save the Shire. But I feel very small, and very uprooted, and well -
desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible."

He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to
follow Bilbo flamed up in his heart - to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps to
find him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could almost
have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done
on a similar morning long ago.

"My dear Frodo!" exclaimed Gandalf. "Hobbits really are amazing
creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to know
about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can still
surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such an answer, not even
from you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though he little
thought how important it would prove. I am afraid you are right. The Ring
will not be able to stay hidden in the Shire much longer; and for your own
sake, as well as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of
Baggins behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or
in the Wild. I will give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr.
Underhill.

"Well, sir," said Sam dithering a little. "I heard a deal that I didn't
rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir, and
dragons, and a fiery mountain, and - and Elves, sir. I listened because I
couldn't help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless me, sir, but I do
love tales of that sort. And I believe them too, whatever Ted may say.
Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them. Couldn't you take me to see
Elves, sir, when you go?"

"I know. But it is difficult to do both," he objected. If I just vanish
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time."

To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come
to the point. Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than it had for
years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the
Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think
more kindly of journeying, as it always did at that season. He had indeed
privately made up his mind to leave on his fiftieth birthday: Bilbo's one
hundred and twenty-eighth. It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set
out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one
thing that made the thought of leaving bearable. He thought as little as
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in the end. But he did
not tell all his thoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed was always
difficult to tell.

"I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and of
saying farewell, that I have never even considered the direction," said
Frodo. "For where am I to go? And by what shall I steer? What is to be my
quest? Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose
one, and not return, as far as I can see."

On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland,
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his new home,
by way of the Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became really anxious,
and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning,
dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was
quite small, just a dinner for himself and his four helpers; but he was
troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought that he would so soon have
to part with his young friends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he
would break it to them.

When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things they had done
together, they toasted Bilbo's birthday, and they drank his health and
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff
of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodo's party
was over, and Gandalf had not come.

his hand, and then turned and (following Bilbo, if he had known it) hurried
after Peregrin down the garden-path. They jumped over the low place in the

"That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming," said Pippin. "Or is it
one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging."

"I don't know," said Frodo. It came to me then, as if I was making it
up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds me very much of
Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was
only one Road; that it was like a great river: its springs were at every
doorstep, and every path was its tributary. "It's a dangerous business,
Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and
if you don't keep your feet, there is no knowing where you might be swept
off to. Do you realize that this is the very path that goes through

He felt that he had only to slip it on, and then he would be safe. The
advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. "And I am still in
the Shire," he thought, as his hand touched the chain on which it hung. At
that moment the rider sat up, and shook the reins. The horse stepped
forward, walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot.

Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind
was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the road began to
fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A star came out above the trees in
the darkening East before them. They went abreast and in step, to keep up
their spirits. After a time, as the stars grew thicker and brighter, the
feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer listened for the sound of
hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk
along, especially when they are drawing near to home at night. With most
hobbits it is a supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits hummed a
walking-song (though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed).
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune that was as old as the hills,
and taught it to Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the Water -valley and
talked about Adventure.

"This is indeed wonderful!" they said. "Three hobbits in a wood at
night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo went away. What is the
meaning of it?"

"We know many things," they said. "We have seen you often before with
Bilbo, though you may not have seen us."

"Be careful, friends!" cried Gildor laughing. "Speak no secrets! Here
is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was a good master. Hail,
Elf-friend!" he said, bowing to Frodo. "Come now with your friends and join
our company! You had best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. You
may be weary before we halt."

"Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?"

Gildor smiled. "Yes," he answered. "Twice. He said farewell to us on
this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from here." He would say no
more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent.

"Then I'll tell you what to think," said Maggot. "You should never have
gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo. Folk are queer up
there." Sam stirred in his chair, and looked at the farmer with an
unfriendly eye. "But you were always a reckless lad. When I heard you had
left the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you
were going to find trouble. Mark my words, this all comes of those strange
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion in foreign

"Well, Mr. Frodo," Maggot went on, "I'm glad that you've had the sense
to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay there! And don't get mixed up
with these outlandish folk. You'll have friends in these parts. If any of
these black fellows come after you again, I'll deal with them. I'll say
you're dead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be
true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of."

Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his own favourite
things - or Bilbo's things (they reminded him sharply of him in their new
selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been at Bag End.

splashing and wallowing. The voice of Pippin was suddenly lifted up above
the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs.

"Cousin Frodo has been very close," said Pippin. "But the time has come
for him to open out. So far we have been given nothing more to go on than
Farmer Maggot's guess that it has something to do with old Bilbo's
treasure."

"I think, ' answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as far as
it goes. There is a connexion with Bilbo's old adventures, and the Riders
are looking, or perhaps one ought to say searching, for him or for me. I
also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not
safe here or anywhere else." He looked round at the windows and walls, as if
he was afraid they would suddenly give way. The others looked at him in
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves.

"Oh no!" said Merry. "Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep for
long, of course; but at present it is, I think, only known to us
conspirators. After all, you must remember that we know you well, and are
often with you. We can usually guess what you are thinking. I knew Bilbo,
too. To tell you the truth, I had been watching you rather closely ever
since he left. I thought you would go after him sooner or later; indeed I
expected you to go sooner, and lately we have been very anxious. We have
been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on
your own like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and
done a good deal of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape
so easily!"

"Yes, the Ring," said Merry. "My dear old hobbit, you don't allow for
the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence of the Ring
for years - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded
it as secret, I kept the knowledge in my head, until we formed our
conspiracy. I did not know Bilbo, of course, as well as I know you; I was
too young, and he was also more careful - but he was not careful enough. If
you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you."

"It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall, as you might
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the
road, when I saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared,
coming towards us. Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he vanished. I
was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary
fashion; but I got through the hedge and walked along the field inside. I
was peeping through into the road, after the S.-B.s had passed, and was
looking straight at Bilbo when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of
gold as he put something back in his trouser -pocket.

It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on his
adventure long ago, and went to the same tune:

Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears
than he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down,
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders.

But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the very
darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo
Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the
Shire and talking about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage

Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought
he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought
hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no
longer felt limp like a helpless prey.

Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no further
sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be fixed on Pippin. To his alarm
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success
with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance.

Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most of the local
hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those funny people away beyond
the River; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and
had probably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring
the name of Baggins to their minds, especially if there had been inquiries
in Bree after that name.

For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began a
ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of (and indeed rather proud
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that is
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a
few words of it are now, as a rule, remembered.

"I'll do that," said Butterbur. "But they'll find out he's here without
help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself
this evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo's going off has
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing
in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he
is."

Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing how I
was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my
letters. He was mighty book -learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote
poetry. He wrote what I have just said."

"He did not make it up," said Strider. "It is pan of the lay that is
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have
translated it. I never knew that."

time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his journey
and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had happened. Frodo
guessed that they were now in the same region, and wondered if by chance
they would pass near the spot.

"I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!" said Pippin. He knew
the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact
he had never more than half believed it. Even now he looked at the stone
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them
to life again.

They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder of
Bilbo's first successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was warm
and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be lifting a little.
They rested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs.

In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were probably
following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many
years before. After a few miles they came out on the top of a high bank
above the Road. At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and
winding eastward among woods and heather -covered slopes towards the Ford
and

"There!" said Merry. "That must be the stone that marked the place
where the trolls' gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo's share, I
wonder, Frodo?"

Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought home no
treasure more perilous, nor less easy to pan with. "None at all," he said.

"Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it
came from robbers."

"I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.’

"Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. "I wonder where he is. I wish he was
here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow
jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that he fell fast
asleep.

Frodo was now safe in the Fast Homely House east of the Sea. That house
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, 'a perfect house, whether you like food
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or
a pleasant mixture of them all'. Merely to be there was a cure for
weariness, fear, and sadness.

longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and
probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He got out of bed and
discovered that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever had
been. He found laid ready clean garments of green cloth that fitted him
excellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled to see a much thinner
reflection of himself than he remembered: it looked remarkably like the
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire;
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully.

"Quite right," answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions and
courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. "And I do not ask, for I
have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery."

"You have had some very strange adventures, I hear," said Gluin. "I
wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey. Nothing like
it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?"

"I will come and see them, if ever I can," said Frodo. "How surprised
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!"

Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. "You were very fond of Bilbo were you
not?" he asked.

"Bilbo!" cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward.

"Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. "So you have got here at last. I

Elrond laughed. "He shall be found," he said. "Then you two shall go
into a corner and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before
we end our merrymaking." Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though
none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast.

In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious
of the mirth and music in the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of
himself. When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the
Road or in the country on either side; but somehow he had steered all the
time towards Ri vendell. "I got here without much adventure," he said, 'and
after a rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't
travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here I
have been. I have done this and that. I have written some more of my book.
And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to
please me, I think; for, of course, they aren't really good enough for
Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just
is. A remarkable place altogether.

"And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do no good
to you or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again." Odd sort of
remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let
things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound." He paused and
looked at Frodo doubtfully.

"Well, I should just like to see it for a moment," said Bilbo.

When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the Ring had been
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out.
Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodo quickly drew back the Ring. To his
distress and amazement he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a
shadow seemed to have fallen between them, and through it he found himself
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.
He felt a desire to strike him.

The music and singing round them seemed to falter and a silence fell.
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. "I
understand now," he said. "Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have come in
for this burden: sorry about everything. Don't adventures ever have an end?

of memory. The light and music of Rivendell was about him again. Bilbo
smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo
could tell-aided and corrected now and again by Sam-was of the greatest
interest to him, from the felling of the least tree to the pranks of the
smallest child in Hobbiton. They were so deep in the doings of the Four
Farthings that they did not notice the arrival of a man clad in dark green
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile.

Suddenly Bilbo looked up. "Ah, there you are at last, D®nadan!’ he
cried.

"Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway," said Bilbo.

' The D®nadan," said Bilbo. "Fie is often called that here. But I thought
you knew enough Elvish at least to know d®n-udan: Man of the West,
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!’ He turned to Strider.

Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. "I know," he said. "But often I
must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wild
unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once."

"Well, my dear fellow," said Bilbo, 'now you've heard the news, can't
you spare me a moment? I want your help in something urgent. Elrond says
this song of mine is to be finished before the end of the evening, and I am
stuck. Fet's go off into a corner and polish it up!"

There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned into running
water, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemed to be the voice of Bilbo
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words.

The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that Bilbo was
seated on his stool in a circle of listeners, who were smiling and
applauding.

Bilbo got up and bowed. "I am flattered, Lindir,’ he said. "But it

"What!" cried Bilbo. "You can't tell which parts were mine, and which
were the D®nadan"s?"

"Nonsense, Lindir," snorted Bilbo. "If you can't distinguish between a
Man and a Hobbit, your judgement is poorer than I imagined. They're as
different as peas and apples."

"I won't argue with you," said Bilbo. "I am sleepy after so much music
and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if you want to."

"You needn't,’ said Bilbo. "As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except
that Aragorn insisted on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it
important. I don't know why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing
rather above my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses
about Edrendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was
right."

"It is difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it;' said
Bilbo. "Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the elvish appetite for
music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more.
They will be going on for a long time yet. What do you say to slipping off
for some more quiet talk?"

They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made for the
doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a smile on his face. In
spite of his delight in Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of regret as they
passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped over the threshold a
single clear voice rose in song.

He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish song
fell like clear jewels of blended word and melody. ' It is a song to
Elbereth," said Bilbo. "They will sing that, and other songs of the Blessed
Realm, many times tonight. Come on!"

"And begging yours, Sam Gamgee," replied Bilbo. "I guess you mean that
it is time your master went to bed."

"Quite right, Sam," laughed Bilbo. "You can trot off and tell Gandalf
that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been good
to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good
talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to
see your chapters of our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I think, and
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!"

On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came upon
Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. "Hullo! Good morning!" said Bilbo. "Feel
ready for the great council?’

Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. "That is
the warning bell for the Council of Elrond," cried Gandalf. "Come along now!
Both you and Bilbo are wanted."

Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back
to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten, trotted
Sam.

He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and indeed
though his garments were rich, and his cloak was lined with fur, they were
stained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in which a single white
stone was set; his locks were shorn about his shoulders. On a baldric he
wore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon his knees. He
gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder.

"And so I have been sent at last by Dbin to warn Bilbo that he is
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this
least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and
draws nearer. We discover that messengers have come also to King Brand in
Dale, and that he is afraid. We fear that he may yield. Already war is
gathering on his eastern borders. If we make no answer, the Enemy may move
Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Dbin also."

Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed
on his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out:

"But not yet, I beg, Master!’ said Bilbo. "Already the Sun is climbing
to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.’

"Very well," said Bilbo. "I will do as you bid. But I will now tell the
true story, and if some here have heard me tell it otherwise' — he looked
sidelong at Gluin — l ask them to forget it and forgive me. I only wished
to claim the treasure as my very own in those days, and to be rid of the
name of thief that was put on me. But perhaps I understand things a little
better now. Anyway, this is what happened."

To some there Bilbo's tale was wholly new, and they listened with
amazement while the old hobbit, actually not at all displeased, recounted
his adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit a single riddle.

Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his dealings with
the Ring from the day that it passed into his keeping. Every step of his
journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was questioned and considered,
and everything that he could recall concerning the Black Riders was
examined. At last he sat down again.

"Not bad," Bilbo said to him. "You would have made a good story of it,
if they hadn't kept on interrupting. I tried to make a few notes, but we
shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am to write it
up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!"

"Yes, long and weary," said Gandalf, 'but not without profit. For one
thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now
told openly for the first time; but that mattered little, since I had
already guessed it. But I learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of
the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also that he had
possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring had
lengthened his years far beyond their span; but that power only the Great
Rings wield.

"This is grievous news concerning Saruman," he said; 'for we trusted
him and he is deep in all our counsels. It is perilous to study too deeply
the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill. But such falls and betrayals,
alas, have happened before. Of the tales that we have heard this day the
tale of Frodo was most strange to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo
here; and it seems to me that he is perhaps not so alone and singular as I
had thought him. The world has changed much since I last was on the
westward
roads.

"Very well, very well, Master Elrond!" said Bilbo suddenly. "Say no
more! It is plain enough what you are pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit
started this affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was very
comfortable here, and getting on with my book. If you want to know, I am
just writing an ending for it. I had thought of putting: and he lived
happily ever afterwards to the end of his days. It is a good ending, and
none the worse for having been used before. Now I shall have to alter that:
it does not look like coming true; and anyway there will evidently have to
be several more chapters, if I live to write them. It is a frightful
nuisance. When ought I to start?

' Boromir looked in surprise at Bilbo, but the laughter died on his
lips when he saw that all the others regarded the old hobbit with grave
respect. Only Gluin smiled, but his smile came from old memories.

"Of course, my dear Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. "If you had really started
this affair, you might be expected to finish it. But you know well enough
now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only a small part
is played in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was
meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiant offer.

But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has
passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your part is
ended, unless as a recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending
unaltered! There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when
they come back."

Bilbo laughed. "I have never known you give me pleasant advice before."
he said. "As all your unpleasant advice has been good, I wonder if this
advice is not bad. Still, I don't suppose I have the strength or luck left
to deal with the Ring. It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do
you mean by they?

No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo glanced
at all the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the Council sat with
downcast eyes, as if in deep thought. A great dread fell on him, as if he
was awaiting the pronouncement of some doom that he had long foreseen and
vainly hoped might after all never be spoken. An overwhelming longing to
rest and remain at peace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell filled all his heart.

Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room.
Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the
Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion.

"Talking,' said Bilbo. "There was a deal of talk, and everyone had an
eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas's bit of news about Gollum
caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off."

"Well, anyway," said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor
Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I
was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the
reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?"

"That can't be helped," said Bilbo. "It's your fault partly, Frodo my
lad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funny way of honouring it, I
can't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can't
go till the reports come back.

"How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to Bilbo when
Gandalf had gone.

"Oh, I don't know. I can't count days in Rivendell," said Bilbo. "But
quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping

"Oh, that won't do!" said Bilbo. "Books ought to have good endings. How
would this do: and they all settled down and lived together happily ever
after?"

Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of their road and
the perils they would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with
them; but he was content to lean on their guidance, and he spent as much
time as he could with Bilbo.

In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall
of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren
and L®thien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry
and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo in
his own small room. Then Bilbo would read passages from his book (which
still seemed very incomplete), or scraps of his verses, or would take notes
of Frodo's adventures.

On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo, and the old
hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted the lid and
fumbled inside.

"Also there is this!" said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed to
be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several folds of old cloth, and
held up a small shirt of mail. It was close-woven of many rings, as supple
almost as linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel. It shone like moonlit
silver, and was studded with white gems. With it was a belt of pearl and
crystal.

"It's a pretty thing, isn't it?" said Bilbo, moving it in the light.

"Just what I said myself,’ said Bilbo. "But never mind about looks. You
can wear it under your outer clothes. Come on! You must share this secret
with me. Don't tell anybody else! But I should feel happier if I knew you
were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the knives of the Black
Riders," he ended in a low voice.

"Very well, I will take it," said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, and
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the top his
old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and jacket.

"Just a plain hobbit you look," said Bilbo. "But there is more about
you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!" He turned away and
looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune.

"I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all our past
kindnesses," said Frodo.

Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, for
dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed axe.
Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white knife. The
younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from the barrow; but
Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden.
Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was the elven-sword Glamdring,
the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely
Mountain.

Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire, and they
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A
gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in
many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the doorstep beside
Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey shapes in the
darkness.

"Good . . . good luck!" cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. "I don't
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall expect a
full account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!"

Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 131 1, when the white wolves
invaded

A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into a
warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes, and out of the
shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice speaking. /
don 't think much of your diary , he said. Snowstorms on January the twelfth:
there was no need to come back to report that!

But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo , Frodo answered with an effort, when
he felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir
had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.

polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet
harder than tempered steel. Its beauty was like to that of common silver,
but the beauty of mithril did not tarnish or grow dim. The Elves dearly
loved it, and among many uses they made of it ithildin , starmoon, which you
saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave
him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving
Mathom-house, I suppose."

Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking
about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt
no doubt that Bilbo knew quite well. It was indeed a kingly gift. But now
his thoughts had been carried away from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to
Bilbo, and to Bag End in the days while Bilbo was still there. He wished
with all his heart that he was back there, and in those days, mowing the
lawn, or pottering among the flowers, and that he had never heard of Moria,
or mithril — or the Ring.

The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin. Frodo
thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and of Balin's
visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the mountains it
seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world.

’You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. "There is more about you than
meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if the remark
meant more than it said.

"I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close in his
little room," said Merry. "Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever.

"Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next! ' said Sam.

"No, I'll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But-well. I
can't talk of it any more. I can't bear to think of bringing the news to
him."

The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he caught a
glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. The table was littered

"Ah," said Sam. "I do; and I remember more too. I don't like my
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo's stories and
all, I fancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess. A nasty name.
Gollum, maybe? '

He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands, staring
eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo
left the Shire was passing through his mind, and he recalled and pondered
everything that he could remember of Gandalf s words. Time went on, and
still he was no nearer to a choice.

"But he wouldn't keep it on' 1 said Merry. "Not when he had escaped the
unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to."

