It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits are
relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of old
they spoke the languages of Men, after their own fashion, and liked and
disliked much the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship
is can no longer be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in
the Elder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves still
preserve any records of that vanished time, and their traditions are
concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom
and Hobbits are not mentioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in
fact, lived quietly in Middle-earth for many long years before other folk
became even aware of them. And the world being after all full of strange
creatures beyond count, these little people seemed of very little
importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly
became, by no wish of their own, both important and renowned, and troubled

The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large, and
inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors very
exceptional, as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendship
with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or
the Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relatives lived in
(comparative) peace together in one ancestral and many -tunnelled mansion.
All Hobbits were, in any case, clannish and reckoned up their relationships
with great care. They drew long and elaborate family -trees with innumerable
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who is related
to whom, and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out
a family -tree that included even the more important members of the more
important families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical
trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small book in
themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them exceedingly dull. Hobbits
delighted in such things, if they were accurate: they liked to have books
filled with things that they already knew, set out fair and square with no
contradictions.

At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they were called,
had been greatly increased. There were many reports and complaints of
strange persons and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the
first sign that all was not quite as it should be, and always had been
except in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even
Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty years had passed since
he set out on his memorable journey, and he was old even for Hobbits, who
reached a hundred as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the
considerable wealth that he had brought back. How much or how little he
revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favourite 'nephew'. And he still
kept secret the ring that he bad found.

Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told
it to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had promised to
give him a present, if he won the game; but when Gollum went to fetch it
from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the very
ring that he had found, and as he had won the game, it was already his by
right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum
show him the way out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the
original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts. But
many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived no doubt
from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually written by the old
hobbit himself.

his return to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf
and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence, or so he
believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of his Journey that he was
writing.

the history of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long
preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns, Wardens of the
Westmarch. 1 It was in origin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with him
to Rivendell. Frodo brought it back to the Shire, together with many loose
leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages with his
account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, probably m a
single red case, were the three large volumes, bound in red leather, that
Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift. To these four volumes there was added
in Westmarch a fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship.

The Thain’s Book was thus the first copy made of the Red Book and
contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received
much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words, and
quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated
version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside
the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have been written by
Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the
King. But the chief importance of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains
the whole of Bilbo's ’Translations from the Elvish'. These three volumes
were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between 1403
and 1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both
living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost
entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here.

The eldest of these, and Bilbo's favourite, was young Frodo Baggins.
When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to
live at Bag End; and the hopes of the Sackville-Bagginses were finally
dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same birthday, September
22nd.

"You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad," said Bilbo one day; 'and
then we can celebrate our birthday-parties comfortably together." At that

time Frodo was still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible
twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.

Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given very lively
combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but now it was understood that
something quite exceptional was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was
going to be eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious number and a very
respectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130);
and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33) an important number: the date of
his 'coming of age'.

No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly
known as the Gaffer. He held forth at The Ivy Bush , a small inn on the
Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden
at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before
that. Now that he was himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job
was mainly carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son
were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.

"But what about this Frodo that lives with him?" asked Old Noakes of
By water. "Baggins is his name, but he's more than half a Brandybuck, they
say. It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife
away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer."

fool about with boats on that big river - and that isn’t natural. Small
wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is
as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo,
and in more than looks. After all his father was a Baggins. A decent
respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins; there was never much to tell of
him, till he was drownded."

Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest
of the Old Took's daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So Mr.
Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying
is, if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Flail with his
father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (him
being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous
table); and he went out boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. '

"You shouldn't listen to all you hear, Sandyman," said the Gaffer, who
did not much like the miller. "There isn't no call to go talking of pushing
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit still without
looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo
left an orphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queer
Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than a couple of hundred
relations in the place. Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he
brought the lad back to live among decent folk.

by the hobbits one Gross, though the word was not considered proper to use
of people); and the guests were selected from all the families to which
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with the addition of a few special unrelated
friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and present by
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the
matter of sitting up late, especially when there was a chance of getting
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.

with Bilbo, and some of them had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before, as
they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were not
forgotten. Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and
detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in
golden ink, that they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides, their
cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing in food for many years and his table
had a high reputation.

Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance today. Some perfunctory
clapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of ’Frodo! Frodo! Jolly old
Frodo," from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what
was meant by 'coming into his inheritance'. Together we score one hundred
and forty-four. Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total: One
Gross, if I may use the expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of
his guests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling
sure they had only been asked to fill up the required number, like goods in
a package. "One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression."

He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again.

Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time he
had sat silent beside Bilbo's empty chair, and ignored all remarks and
questions. He had enjoyed the joke, of course, even though he had been in
the know. He had difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant
surprise of the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled: he
realized suddenly that he loved the old hobbit dearly. Most of the guests
went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins' oddities, past and
present; but the Sackville-Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo
did not want to have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for more
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass silently to the
health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion.

round his waist a worn leather belt. On it he hung a short sword in a
battered black-leather scabbard. From a locked drawer, smelling of
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if
they were very precious, but they were so patched and weatherstained that
their original colour could hardly be guessed: it might have been dark
green. They were rather too large for him. He then went into his study, and
from a large strong-box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths, and a
leather -bound manuscript; and also a large bulky envelope. The book and
bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy bag that was standing there,
already nearly full. Into the envelope he slipped his golden ring, and its
fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At first he put
it on the mantelpiece, but suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his
pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in.

"Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as
it has gone. You'll keep an eye on Frodo, won't you?"

"Then trust mine," said Gandalf. "It is quite made up. Go away and
leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after
him."

"Very well," said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo with all the rest." He drew
a deep breath. "And now I really must be starting, or somebody else will
catch me. I have said good-bye, and I couldn't bear to do it all over
again." He picked up his bag and moved to the door.

"No, don’t give the ring to me," said Gandalf. "Put it on the
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait
for him."

Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep
in thought. "Has he gone?" he asked.

' I wish - 1 mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,"
said Frodo. "But I knew in my heart that he really meant to go. He always
used to joke about serious things. I wish I had come back sooner, just to
see him off."

Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced at it, but
did not open it.

"The ring!" exclaimed Frodo. "Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still,
it may be useful."

As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye to
the guests. Rumours of strange events had by now spread all over the field,
but Frodo would only say no doubt everything will be cleared up in the
morning. About midnight carriages came for the important folk. One by one
they rolled away, filled with full but very unsatisfied hobbits. Gardeners
came by arrangement, and removed in wheel-barrows those that had
inadvertently remained behind.

Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired and
worried. He welcomed all the callers, but he had not much more to say than
before. His reply to all inquiries was simply this: "Mr. Bilbo Baggins has
gone away; as far as I know, for good." Some of the visitors he invited to
come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them.

Bilbo, on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo's sister and the eldest
surviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had
written reams of good advice for more than half a century.

There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of course, all the
chief treasures, as well as the books, pictures, and more than enough
furniture, were left in his possession. There was, however, no sign nor
mention of money or jewellery: not a penny -piece or a glass bead was given
away.

Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour that the
whole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire; and before
long the place was packed with people who had no business there, but could
not be kept out. Fabels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make off
with minor items not addressed to them, or with anything that seemed
unwanted or unwatched. The road to the gate was blocked with barrows and
handcarts.

In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo
had retired for a while and left his friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye
on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely.

they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot of
papers in front of him. He looked indisposed - to see Sackville-Bagginses at
any rate; and he stood up, fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he
spoke quite politely.

The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began by offering
him bad bargain-prices (as between friends) for various valuable and
unlabelled things. When Frodo replied that only the things specially
directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very
fishy.

Otho would have been Bilbo's heir, but for the adoption of Frodo. He
read the will carefully and snorted. It was, unfortunately, very clear and
correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other
things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink).

Spoons? Fiddlesticks!" He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out
of the study to see how things were going on and found her still about the
place, investigating nooks and comers and tapping the floors. He escorted
her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but
rather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside her umbrella. Her
face looked as if she was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing
parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:

"Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like," said Frodo
as he shut the door on her.

Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits (two
Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking holes in the walls of one of the
cellars. Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho Proudfoot (old Odo
Proudfoot's grandson), who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry,
where he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both
curiosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously obtained, if not
positively ill-gotten), is, as every one knows, any one's for the finding

When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo collapsed on
chair in the hall. It's time to close the shop, Merry," he said. "Lock the
door, and don’t open it to anyone today, not even if they bring a battering
ram.’ Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea.

"If you don't let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down your
hole and out through the hill," he said.

"My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!" cried Frodo, running out of the room
to the door. "Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia."

"Don't do that!" said Gandalf, sitting down. "Do be careful of that
ring, Frodo ! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last
word."

"Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book," said Frodo. "He
told me the true story soon after I came to live here. He said you had
pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. "No secrets between
us, Frodo," he said; "but they are not to go any further. It's mine
anyway.'"

"I don't understand," said Frodo.

"At once!" cried Frodo. "Why, I thought you were staying on for at
least a week. I was looking forward to your help."

"Some people!" exclaimed Frodo. "You mean Otho and Lobelia. How
abominable! I would give them Bag End and everything else, if I could get
Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country with him. I love the Shire.
But I begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever
see him again."

Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought the old wizard looked unusually
bent, almost as if he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing
in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not
see him again for a long time.

"If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps
he'll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense," they said. And to all
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the
growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to
carry on Bilbo's reputation for oddity. He refused to go into mourning; and
the next year he gave a party in honour of Bilbo's hundred-and-twelfth
birthday, which he called Hundred-weight Feast. But that was short of the
mark, for twenty guests were invited and there were several meals at which
it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say.

Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving
Bilbo's Birthday Party year after year until they got used to it. He said
that he did not think Bilbo was dead. When they asked: "Where is he then?"
he shrugged his shoulders.

He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many friends,
especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the Old Took)
who had as children been fond of Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End.
Folco Boffin and Fredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real
name was Meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping
all

As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of
good ’preservation': outwardly he retained the appearance of a robust and
energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. ’Some folk have all the luck,’ they
said; but it was not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age of
fifty that they began to think it queer.

Frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own master
and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For some years he was
quite happy and did not worry much about the future. But half unknown to
himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He
found himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about the wild
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his
dreams. He began to say to himself: "Perhaps I shall cross the River myself
one day." To which the other half of his mind always replied: "Not yet."

So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his fiftieth
birthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that he felt was somehow
significant (or ominous); it was at any rate at that age that adventure had
suddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths
seemed too well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay beyond
their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly white spaces beyond its
borders. He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and
Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking
and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in
the Shire.

There were rumours of strange things happening in the world outside;
and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several
years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the
Shire, could now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening,
passing and not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and were no
longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road
in unusual numbers. The ancient East -West Road ran through the Shire to its
end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their
mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits' chief source of news
from distant parts - if they wanted any: as a rule dwarves said little and
hobbits asked no more. But now Frodo often met strange dwarves of far
countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in

But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began to hear queer tales; and
those whose business took them to the borders saw strange things. The
conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater, one evening in the spring of
Frodo's fiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the
Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them.

"Oh, they're both cracked," said Ted. "Leastways old Bilbo was cracked,
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where you get your news from, you'll never

It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. Then he paid
Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went off again.
During the next year or two he had turned up fairly often, coming
unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise. He
would not discuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chiefly
interested in small news about Frodo's health and doings.

Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodo
had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the wizard would
never return and had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as
Sam was walking home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar
tap on the study window.

Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight. They
looked hard at one another.

’Ah well eh?" said Gandalf. "You look the same as ever, Frodo!"

"So do you," Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked
older and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide
world, and soon they were deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the
night.

Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with Frodo
by the open window of the study. A bright fire was on the hearth, but the
sun was warm, and the wind was in the South. Everything looked fresh, and
the new green of Spring was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the
trees' fingers.

He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep in
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.

"A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does not die, but
he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues, until at last
every minute is a weariness. And if he often uses the Ring to make himself
invisible, he fades: he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks
in the twilight under the eye of the dark power that rules the Rings. Yes,
sooner or later - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but
neither strength nor good purpose will last - sooner or later the dark power
will devour him."

"How terrifying!" said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound
of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.

"How long have you known this?" asked Frodo at length. "And how much
did Bilbo know?"

"Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter," said Frodo, 'so I have
always kept it on its chain."

"How long have you known all this?" asked Frodo again.

"Known?" said Gandalf. "I have known much that only the Wise know,
Frodo. But if you mean "known about this ring", well, I still do not know,
one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess.

"Who is he?" asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before."

"There wasn't any permanent harm done, was there?" asked Frodo
anxiously. "He would get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in
peace, I mean?"

Frodo shuddered. "But why should we be?" he asked. "And why should he
want such slaves?"

"Revenge?" said Frodo. "Revenge for what? I still don't understand what
all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring."

Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain
that hung from his belt. He unfastened it and handed it slowly to the
wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in
some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it.

"No," said Frodo. "There are none. It is quite plain, and it never
shows a scratch or sign of wear."

"Well then, look!" To Frodo's astonishment and distress the wizard
threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the fire. Frodo
gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him back.

"Wait!" he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a quick look from
under his bristling brows.

No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got up,
closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains. The room
became dark and silent, though the clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the
windows, could still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and removed the ring to
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped.

It is quite cool," said Gandalf. "Take it!" Frodo received it on his
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever.

As Frodo did so, he now saw fine lines, finer than the finest
pen-strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that

I cannot read the fiery letters," said Frodo in a quavering voice.

Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out a vast
hand, like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming up to engulf him.
"This ring!" he stammered. "How, how on earth did it come to me?"

"I wish it need not have happened in my time," said Frodo.

that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the
time that is given, us. And already, Frodo, our time is beginning to look
black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are far from ripe,

"And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the One had
perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been done. But he
knows now that it has not perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking
it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent on it. It is his great hope and
our great fear."

"Why, why wasn't it destroyed?" cried Frodo. "And how did the Enemy
ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, and it was so precious to him?"

"Gollum!" cried Frodo. "Gollum? Do you mean that this is the very
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!"

"I can't believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, however
distantly," said Frodo with some heat. "What an abominable notion!"

"Yes," said Frodo. "Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and
of much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat. Gollum meant to cheat all
the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo off his guard. And I daresay
it amused his wickedness to start a game which might end in providing him
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him."

"What do you mean?" said Frodo. "Surely the Ring was his precious and
the only thing he cared for? But if he hated it, why didn't he get rid of
it, or go away and leave it?"

"You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have heard,"
said Gandalf. "He hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved himself. He
could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter.

"A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. It may slip off
treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he plays with the
idea of handing it on to someone else's care - and that only at an early
stage, when it first begins to grip. But as far as I know Bilbo alone in
history has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. He needed all my
help, too. And even so he would never have just forsaken it, or cast it
aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided things.

"What, just in time to meet Bilbo?" said Frodo. "Wouldn't an Ore have
suited it better?"

"There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ring was trying to
get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur's hand and betrayed him;
then when a chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after
that Gollum, and it had devoured him. It could make no further use of him:
he was too small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never
leave his deep pool again. So now, when its master was awake once more and
sending out his dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Only to
be

It is not," said Frodo. "Though I am not sure that I understand you.

Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much and I have
learned much," he answered. "But I am not going to give an account of all my
doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known
to all the Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire- writing
alone, apart from any other evidence." "And when did you discover that?"
asked Frodo, interrupting. "Just now in this room, of course," answered the
wizard sharply. "But I expected to find it. I have come back from dark
journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof, and
all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the
gap in the history, required some thought. I may have started with guesses
about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him."

"You have seen Gollum?" exclaimed Frodo in amazement.

"But how did he find that out?" asked Frodo.

"Is that where you found him?" asked Frodo.

"Then why didn't he track Bilbo further?" asked Frodo. "Why didn't he
come to the Shire?"

"But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It wandered
off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves' ken, and was lost. And then
I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may
prove the worst. I let the matter be. I let him go; for I had much else to
think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman.

A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart beating.

"The Shire - he may be seeking for it now, if he has not already found
out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he may even think that the
long -unnoticed name of Baggins has become important."

"But this is terrible!" cried Frodo. "Far worse than the worst that I
imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I
to do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!"

without need. And he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so
little hurt from the evil, and escaped in the end, because he began his
ownership of the Ring so. With Pity."

"I am sorry," said Frodo. "But I am frightened; and I do not feel any
pity for Gollum."

"No, and I don't want to," said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do you
mean to say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on after all those
horrible deeds? Now at any rate he is as bad as an Ore, and just an enemy.
He deserves death."

"All the same," said Frodo, 'even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I
wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had
not got it! Why did you let me keep it? Why didn't you make me throw it
away, or, or destroy it?"

"Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that has
troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake that I had to take some
risk - though even when I was far away there has never been a day when the
Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I
did not think that the Ring would have any lasting effect on you, not for
evil, not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine

"But why not destroy it, as you say should have been done long ago?"
cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even sent me a message, I would
have done away with it."

Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. It now
appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device that he could see. The
gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was
its colour, how perfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing and
altogether precious. When he took it out he had intended to fling it from
him into the very hottest part of the fire. But he found now that he could
not do so, not without a great struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand,
hesitating, and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him;
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away -
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket.

Gandalf laughed grimly. "You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily
let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not "make" you - except by
force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking the Ring, force is
useless. Even if you took it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it
would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine.

"I do really wish to destroy it!" cried Frodo. "Or, well, to have it
destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wish I had never seen the
Ring ! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?"

He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters.
Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sam passed along the path
outside whistling. "And now," said the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the
decision lies with you. But I will always help you." He laid his hand on
Frodo's shoulder. "I will help you bear this burden, as long as It is yours
to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving."

There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at his
pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, but under the lids he
was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the
hearth, until they filled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking down
into profound wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled Cracks of Doom
and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.

"No!" answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness, and
finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the window he
could see the sunlit garden. "Or perhaps, yes. As far as I understand what
you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the
present, whatever it may do to me."

"I hope so," said Frodo. "But I hope that you may find some other

"My dear Frodo!" exclaimed Gandalf. "Hobbits really are amazing
creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to know
about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can still
surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such an answer, not even
from you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though he little
thought how important it would prove. I am afraid you are right. The Ring
will not be able to stay hidden in the Shire much longer; and for your own
sake, as well as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of
Baggins behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or
in the Wild. I will give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr.
Underhill.

Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all was
very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the window.
Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long arm out and
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head
hauled by
one ear.

"Mr. Frodo, sir!" cried Sam quaking. "Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't
let him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would take on so. I
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!"

"He won't hurt you," said Frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing,
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. "He knows, as well as I
do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight
away!"

"So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?"

"It can't be helped, Sam," said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized
that flying from the Shire would mean more painful partings than merely
saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. "I shall have to go.
But' - and here he looked hard at Sam - 'if you really care about me, you
will keep that dead secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of
what you've heard here, then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a spotted
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes."

Sam fell on his knees, trembling. "Get up, Sam!" said Gandalf. I have
thought of something better than that. Something to shut your mouth, and
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!"

"You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon," said Gandalf. Two
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to

"What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?" asked Frodo. "I
think I could probably make some arrangements by then."

He looked at Frodo and smiled. "Very well," he said. "I think that will
do - but it must not be any later. I am getting very anxious. In the
mean-while, do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going!
And see that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him
into a toad."

"As for where I am going," said Frodo, 'it would be difficult to give
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet."

"I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and of
saying farewell, that I have never even considered the direction," said
Frodo. "For where am I to go? And by what shall I steer? What is to be my
quest? Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose
one, and not return, as far as I can see."

"No indeed!" said Frodo. "But in the meantime what course am I to
lake?"

"Rivendell!" said Frodo. "Very good: I will go east, and I will make
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted." He
spoke lightly; but his heart was moved suddenly with a desire to see the
house of Elrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep valley where
many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace.

One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news reached the Ivy Bush
and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were
forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed
he had already sold it - to the Sackville-Bagginses!

Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more
debatable than the price. A few held the theory - supported by the nods and
hints of Mr. Baggins himself - that Frodo's money was running out: he was
going to leave Hobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the sale
down in Buckland among his Brandybuck relations. "As far from the
Sackville-Bagginses as may be," some added. But so firmly fixed had the
notion of the immeasurable wealth of the Bagginses of Bag End become that
most found this hard to believe, harder than any other reason or unreason
that their fancy could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yet

unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go
about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the Bag End'. But
however a removal might fit in with the designs of his wizardry, there was
no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland.

Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one evening, at
the end of June, soon after Frodo's plan had been finally arranged, he
suddenly announced that he was going off again next morning. "Only for a
short while, I hope," he said. "But I am going down beyond the southern
borders to get some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should."

He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried.

At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often what
Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in the fine
weather he forgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had seldom seen so
fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey
was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full.

Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about Gandalf
again. September was passing and there was still no news of him. The
Birthday, and the removal, drew nearer, and still he did not come, or send
word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo's friends came to stay and
help him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco Boffin, and

On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland,
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his new home,
by way of the Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became really anxious,
and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning,
dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was
quite small, just a dinner for himself and his four helpers; but he was
troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought that he would so soon have
to part with his young friends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he
would break it to them.

The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the party
soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf s absence. The dining-room was
bare except for a table and chairs, but the food was good, and there was
good wine: Frodo's wine had not been included in the sale to the
Sackville-Bagginses.

’Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s get their
claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!" said Frodo, as
he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.

When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things they had done
together, they toasted Bilbo's birthday, and they drank his health and
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff
of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodo's party
was over, and Gandalf had not come.

Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo was
restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf. He decided
to wait until nightfall. After that, if Gandalf wanted him urgently, he
would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going
on foot. His plan - for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any
other reason - was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury Ferry, taking it

After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son,
Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo's annoyance. "Ours at last!" said Lobelia,
as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of
Bag End did not take effect until midnight. But Lobelia can perhaps be
forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years longer for
Bag End than she once hoped, and she was now a hundred years old.
Anyway,

she had come to see that nothing she had paid for had been carried off; and
she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought
a complete inventory with her and went right through it. In the end she
departed with Lotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key
would be left at the Gamgees' in Bagshot Row. She snorted, and showed
plainly that she thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole during
the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.

He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen. It had
been officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland 'to do for Mr.
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by
the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia
as a neighbour.

"Our last meal at Bag End!" said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They
left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam strapped up their three
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last stroll in the
garden. Sam disappeared.

The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled.
Frodo

Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why the fact
that they did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief. "I am sick of
questions and curiosity about my doings, I suppose," he thought. "What an
inquisitive lot they all are!" He had half a mind to go and ask the Gaffer
who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and
walked quickly back to Bag End.

Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo
stepped inside the dark door. "Sam!" he called. "Sam! Time!"

"All aboard, Sam?" said Frodo.

Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam. "Run
down with this to your home, Sam!" he said. "Then cut along the Row and meet
us as quick as you can at the gate in the lane beyond the meadows. We are
not going through the village tonight. Too many ears pricking and eyes
prying." Sam ran off at full speed.

"Well, now we're off at last!" said Frodo. They shouldered their packs
and took up their sticks, and walked round the corner to the west side of
Bag End. "Good-bye!" said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He
waved

"I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff," said Frodo. "I
pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs."

"Be kind to a poor old hobbit!" laughed Frodo. "I shall be as thin as a
willow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense.

peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell.

"I thought you liked walking in the dark," said Frodo. "But there is no
great hurry. Merry expects us some time the day after tomorrow; but that
leaves us nearly two days more. We'll halt at the first likely spot."

Leaving the road they went into the deep resin-scented darkness of the
trees, and gathered dead sticks and cones to make a fire. Soon they had a
merry crackle of flame at the foot of a large fir-tree and they sat round it
for a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in an angle of the great
tree's roots, they curled up in their cloaks and blankets, and were soon
fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo feared no danger yet, for they
were still in the heart of the Shire. A few creatures came and looked at

The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that
a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff.

Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him over, and then
walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was rising red out
of the mists that lay thick on the world. Touched with gold and red the
autumn trees seemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared.

"I don't keep water in my pockets," said Frodo. "We thought you had
gone to find some," said Pippin, busy setting out the food, and cups. "You
had better go now."

"You can come too," said Frodo, 'and bring all the water-bottles."

"Not that I ever heard," said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He too was
gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it before. Suddenly
he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly:

"I don't know," said Frodo. It came to me then, as if I was making it
up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds me very much of
Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was
only one Road; that it was like a great river: its springs were at every
doorstep, and every path was its tributary. "It's a dangerous business,
Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and
if you don't keep your feet, there is no knowing where you might be swept
off to. Do you realize that this is the very path that goes through

They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them from seeing
far. "I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us," said Frodo; but even as
he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide
from the view of the rider came over him.

The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not
far from the road. There they lay flat. Frodo hesitated for a second:
curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire to hide. The
sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of
long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head
and peered cautiously above one of the great roots.

When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped.

A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, and he
thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and yet the desire to get
it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to move his hand.

Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until he
dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it seemed to him
that suddenly, before it passed out of sight, the horse turned aside and
went into the trees on the right.

"Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing," said Frodo to
himself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam had remained
flat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and
his strange behaviour.

"There are some Men about," said Frodo. "Down in the Southfarthing they
have had trouble with Big People, I believe. But I have never heard of
anything like this rider. I wonder where he comes from."

"What do you mean?" said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment.
"Why didn't you speak up before?"

"I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back to
our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me: Hello, Sam!
he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a
strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he's only just gone.
I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that Hiked the sound of him. He seemed
mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had left his old home for good.

"The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway," said Frodo. "As a matter of fact I
heard him talking to a stranger, who seemed to be inquiring for me, and I
nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about
it before. I might have been more careful on the road."

"I wish I had waited for Gandalf," Frodo muttered. "But perhaps it
would only have made matters worse."

"I don't know, and I would rather not guess," said Frodo. "All right,
cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present, if you want to be
mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do? I should like a bite and a
sup, but somehow I think we had better move on from here. Your talk of
sniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me."

"Yes, I think we will move on now," said Frodo; 'but not on the road
-in case that rider comes back, or another follows him. We ought to do a
good step more today. Buckland is still miles away."

over which it had run straight for some miles. At that point it bent left
and went down into the lowlands of the Yale making for Stock; but a lane
branched right, winding through a wood of ancient oak-trees on its way to
Woodhall. "That is the way for us," said Frodo.

Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind
was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the road began to
fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A star came out above the trees in
the darkening East before them. They went abreast and in step, to keep up
their spirits. After a time, as the stars grew thicker and brighter, the
feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer listened for the sound of
hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk
along, especially when they are drawing near to home at night. With most
hobbits it is a supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits hummed a
walking-song (though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed).
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune that was as old as the hills,
and taught it to Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the Water -valley and
talked about Adventure.

"Hush!" said Frodo. "I think I hear hoofs again."

"Don't let us go too far!" said Frodo. "I don't want to be seen, but I
want to see if it is another Black Rider."

The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better
than the general darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a
large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. It
showed grey and pale, a line of fading light through the wood. Above it the
stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon.

The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark pass
across the lighter space between two trees, and then halt. It looked like
the black shade of a horse led by a smaller black shadow. The black shadow

stood close to the point where they had left the path, and it swayed from
side to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of snuffling. The shadow bent
to the ground, and then began to crawl towards him.

Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this time
it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before he realized what
he was doing, his hand was groping in his pocket. But at that moment there
came a sound like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in
the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated. It climbed
on to the shadowy horse and seemed to vanish across the lane into the
darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again.

"Yes, it is Elves," said Frodo. "One can meet them sometimes in the
Woody End. They don't live in the Shire, but they wander into it in Spring
and Autumn, out of their own lands away beyond the Tower Hills. I am
thankful that they do! You did not see, but that Black Rider stopped just
here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he
heard the voices he slipped away."

"Listen! They are coming this way," said Frodo. "We have only to wait."

The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above the others. It was
singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and the
others knew nothing. Yet the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape
itself in their thought into words which they only partly understood. This
was the song as Frodo heard it:

The song ended. These are High Elves! They spoke the name of
Elbereth!" said Frodo in amazement, "Few of that fairest folk are ever seen
in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth, east of the Great Sea.
This is indeed a strange chance!"

"Hail, Frodo!" he cried. "You are abroad late. Or are you perhaps
lost?" Then he called aloud to the others, and all the company stopped and
gathered round.

"The meaning of it, fair people," said Frodo, 'is simply that we seem
to be going the same way as you are. I like walking under the stars. But I
would welcome your company."

"And how do you know my name?" asked Frodo in return.

"Who are you, and who is your lord?" asked Frodo.

"Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We are Exiles, and most of our
kindred have long ago departed and we too are now only tarrying here a
while, ere we return over the Great Sea. But some of our kinsfolk dwell
still in peace in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing?

"O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope," said Pippin. Sam
was speechless. "I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion," said Frodo bowing.
"Elen snla l®menn' omentielvo, a star shines on the hour of our meeting," he
added in the high-elven speech.

"Be careful, friends!" cried Gildor laughing. "Speak no secrets! Here
is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was a good master. Hail,
Elf-friend!" he said, bowing to Frodo. "Come now with your friends and join
our company! You had best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. You
may be weary before we halt."

"Why? Where are you going?" asked Frodo.

They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faint
lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) could walk when they wished
without sound or footfall. Pippin soon began to feel sleepy, and staggered
once or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and
saved him from a fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a dream,
with an expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished joy.

The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices; they
seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo and his companions
wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness stole over them.
The night grew on, and the lights in the valley went out. Pippin fell
asleep, pillowed on a green hillock.

"It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party," said Frodo.

Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind was
chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listened
eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them in
their own language. They smiled at him and said laughing: "Here is a jewel
among hobbits!"

After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away
to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and slept the
rest of the night away. Sam refused to leave his master. When Pippin had
gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and
closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor.

They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo questioned Gildor
much about happenings in the wide world outside the Shire. The tidings were
mostly sad and ominous: of gathering darkness, the wars of Men, and the
flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest to
his heart:

Gildor smiled. "Yes," he answered. "Twice. He said farewell to us on
this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from here." He would say no
more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent.

"You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo," said
Gildor. "But I already know a little, and I can read more in your face and
in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you

"It is," said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to
Gandalf and my faithful Sam." He looked down at Sam, who was snoring
gently.

"The Enemy?" said Frodo. "Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?"

"I cannot imagine what information could be more terrifying than your
hints and warnings," exclaimed Frodo. "I knew that danger lay ahead, of
course; but I did not expect to meet it in our own Shire. Can't a hobbit
walk from the Water to the River in peace?"

"And it is also said," answered Frodo: "Go not to the Elves for
counsel, for they will say both no and yes. '

"I am deeply grateful," said Frodo; 'but I wish you would tell me
plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice I may not see
Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know what is the danger that
pursues me."

"Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the Enemy?"
answered Gildor. "Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are deadly. Ask no
more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of
Drogo, will know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. May
Elbereth protect you!"

"But where shall I find courage?" asked Frodo. "That is what I chiefly
need."

Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor finished speaking. "I
will sleep now," he said; and the Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and
he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber.

In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a bower made by a
living tree with branches laced and drooping to the ground; his bed was of
fern and grass, deep and soft and strangely fragrant. The sun was shining
through the fluttering leaves, which were still green upon the tree. He
jumped up and went out.

Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. "What is the plan for
today?" asked Pippin.

"To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible," answered Frodo, and
gave his attention to the food.

"Yes, probably," said Frodo, not liking the reminder. "But I hope to
get across the river without their seeing us."

"Not much - only hints and riddles," said Frodo evasively. "Did you ask
about the sniffing?"

"We didn't discuss it," said Frodo with his mouth full.

"In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused to explain it," said
Frodo sharply. "And now leave me in peace for a bit! I don't want to answer
a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!"

From Frodo' s mind the bright morning - treacherously bright, he thought
- had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the words of Gildor.
The merry voice of Pippin came to him. He was running on the green turf and
singing.

"They are," said Frodo. "Do you like them still, now you have had a
closer view?"

Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outward
sign of the odd change that seemed to have come over him. It did not sound
like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he knew. But it looked
like the old Sam Gamgee sitting there, except that his face was unusually
thoughtful.

Frodo finished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked
over the land ahead, and called to Pippin.

"We can cut straighter than the road anyway," answered Frodo. "The
Ferry is east from Woodhall; but the hard road curves away to the left -you
can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes round the north end of
the Marish so as to strike the causeway from the Bridge above Stock. But
that is miles out of the way. We could save a quarter of the distance if we
made a line for the Ferry from where we stand."

"It is less easy to find people in the woods and fields," answered
Frodo. "And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that
you will be looked for on the road and not off it."

"That settles it!" said Frodo. "Short cuts make delays, but inns make

"I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo," said Sam (in spite of private
misgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).

The hobbits scrambled down a steep green bank and plunged into the thick
trees below. Their course had been chosen to leave Woodhall to their left,
and to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side
of the hills, until they reached the flats beyond. Then they could make
straight for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches
and fences. Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line.

"Look!" he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all looked, and on
the edge high above them they saw against the sky a horse standing. Beside
it stooped a black figure.

They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led the way, and
plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the stream. "Whew!" he said to
Pippin. "We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but we
got under cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear
anything coming?"

"It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags," said Frodo. "That won't
mend matters. Let us keep on as we are going! I am not sure that I want to
come out into the open yet."

Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam
and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly:

Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo
sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came down the wind, like the cry of
some evil and lonely creature. It rose and fell, and ended on a high
piercing note. Even as they sat and stood, as if suddenly frozen, it was
answered by another cry, fainter and further off, but no less chilling to
the blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in
the leaves.

"It was not bird or beast," said Frodo. "It was a call, or a signal —
there were words in that cry, though I could not catch them. But no hobbit
has such a voice."

At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of the wood. Far back
behind them stood the high place where they had breakfasted. Frodo half
expected to see the small distant figure of a horseman on the ridge dark
against the sky; but there was no sign of one. The sun escaping from the
breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining

"One trouble after another!" said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed
as if Pippin had declared the lane was the slot leading to a dragon's den.

"I know," said Frodo. "But all the same," he added with a shamefaced
laugh, "I am terrified of him and his dogs. I have avoided his farm for
years and years. He caught me several times trespassing after mushrooms,
when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat me, and
then took me and showed me to his dogs. "See, lads," he said, "next time
this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can eat him. Now see him off!"
They chased me all the way to the Ferry. I have never got over the fright -
though I daresay the beasts knew their business and would not really have
touched me."

Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few paces. The gate
opened and three huge dogs came pelting out into the lane, and dashed
towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but
Sam shrank against the wall, while two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him
suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the
three halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling.

It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do
it in his own time and fashion, so they all accepted the invitation. "What
about the dogs?" asked Frodo anxiously.

Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!" he cried. "Heel, Wolf!" To the relief of Frodo and
Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free.

Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer. "Mr. Frodo Baggins," he
said. "You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall." At the

name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment
Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and
that

"If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you better," said
the farmer. "But I wasn't worrying about that. You have leave to walk over
my land, if you have a mind, Mr. Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins - though I
daresay you still like mushrooms." He laughed. "Ah yes, I recognized the
name. I recollect the time when young Frodo Baggins was one of the worst
young rascals of Buckland. But it wasn't mushrooms I was thinking of. I had
just heard the name Baggins before you turned up. What do you think that
funny customer asked me?"

Frodo sat for a moment looking at the fire, but his only thought was
how on earth would they reach the Ferry. "I don't know what to think," he
said at last.

"Then I'll tell you what to think," said Maggot. "You should never have
gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo. Folk are queer up
there." Sam stirred in his chair, and looked at the farmer with an
unfriendly eye. "But you were always a reckless lad. When I heard you had
left the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you
were going to find trouble. Mark my words, this all comes of those strange
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion in foreign

Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were rather
disconcerting.

"Well, Mr. Frodo," Maggot went on, "I'm glad that you've had the sense
to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay there! And don't get mixed up
with these outlandish folk. You'll have friends in these parts. If any of
these black fellows come after you again, I'll deal with them. I'll say
you're dead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be
true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of."

"Maybe you're right," said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's eye and staring
at the fire.

"I was thinking so," said Frodo. But we have got to try and get there;
and it won't be done by sitting and thinking. Sol am afraid we must be
going. Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I've been in terror of
you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laugh
to hear it. It's a pity: for I've missed a good friend. And now I'm sorry to
leave so soon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one day - if I get a chance."

"And so should we!" said Frodo. "But we must be going at once, I'm
afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry."

Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin
and Sam. The sun was already behind the western hills, and the light was
failing. Two of Maggot's sons and his three daughters came in, and a
generous supper was laid on the large table. The kitchen was lit with

It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The hobbits
wrapped themselves up, but their ears were strained for any sound above the
creak of the wheels and the slow clop of the ponies' hoofs. The waggon
seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him Pippin was nodding towards
sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog.

"You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam anxiously. "You get down
in the waggon and cover up with blankets, and we'll send this rider to the
rightabouts!" He climbed out and went to the farmer's side. Black Riders
would have to ride over him to get near the waggon.

Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. "So there you are at
last!" said Merry. "I was beginning to wonder if you would turn up at all
today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across
and rode up towards Stock to see if you had fallen in any ditches. But I'm
blest if I know which way you have come. Where did you find them, Mr.
Maggot? In your duck-pond?"

"No, I caught 'em trespassing," said the farmer, 'and nearly set my
dogs on 'em; but they'll tell you all the story, I've no doubt. Now, if
you'll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and all, I'd best be turning for
home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick."

dwindled into the foggy night. Suddenly Frodo laughed: from the covered
basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising.

The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buckland shore drew
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his
old life lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched
his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone
on living quietly at Bag End.

"Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?"

"Something that is following us," said Frodo. "But don't ask any more
now! Let's get away at once!" They hurried up the path to the top of the
bank, but when they looked back the far shore was shrouded in mist, and
nothing could be seen.

"Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west -bank!" said Frodo.
"Can horses cross the river?"

"We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot," said Frodo; 'but we could
do with another."

It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo's new house at
Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the
outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south from
the Bridge. Half a mile northward along this they came to a lane opening on
their right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it climbed up and
down into the country.

At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could be
seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of
a wide circle of lawn surrounded by a belt of low trees inside the outer
hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of
the country, and there were no other dwellings close by. You could get in
and out without being noticed. It had been built a long while before by the
Brandybucks, for the use of guests, or members of the family that wished to
escape from the crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an
old-fashioned countrified house, as much like a hobbit-hole as possible: it
was long and low, with no upper storey; and it had a roof of turf, round
windows, and a large round door.

As they walked lip the green path from the gate no light was visible;
the windows were dark and shuttered. Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty
Bolger opened it. A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and
shut themselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on
either side; in front of them a passage ran back down the middle of the
house.

Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his own favourite
things - or Bilbo's things (they reminded him sharply of him in their new
selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been at Bag End.

"Which order shall we go in?" said Frodo. "Eldest first, or quickest
first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin."

There was a terrific splash, and a shout of Whoa! from Frodo. It
appeared that a lot of Pippin's bath had imitated a fountain and leaped on
high.

Merry went to the door: "What about supper and beer in the throat?" he
called. Frodo came out drying his hair.

"They're mine!" said Frodo. "Given to me by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among
farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them."

Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even the greediest
likings of Big People. A fact which partly explains young Frodo's long
expeditions to the renowned fields of the Marish, and the wrath of the
injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to
hobbit standards. There were also many other things to follow, and when they
had finished even Fatty Bolger heaved a sigh of content. They pushed back
the table, and drew chairs round the fire.

"We have all been scared," said Pippin after a pause, in which Frodo
stared at the fire and did not speak. "You would have been, too, if you had
been chased for two days by Black Riders."

"Black figures riding on black horses," answered Pippin. "If Frodo
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning." He then gave
a full account of their journey from the time when they left Hobbiton. Sam
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.

"I should think you were making it all up," said Merry, 'if I had not
seen that black shape on the landing-stage - and heard the queer sound in
Maggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?"

"Cousin Frodo has been very close," said Pippin. "But the time has come
for him to open out. So far we have been given nothing more to go on than
Farmer Maggot's guess that it has something to do with old Bilbo's
treasure."

"That was only a guess," said Frodo hastily. "Maggot does not know
anything."

"Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow," said Merry. "A lot goes on behind his
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go
into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a good
many strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think
his guess good or bad."

"I think, ' answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as far as
it goes. There is a connexion with Bilbo's old adventures, and the Riders
are looking, or perhaps one ought to say searching, for him or for me. I
also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not
safe here or anywhere else." He looked round at the windows and walls, as if
he was afraid they would suddenly give way. The others looked at him in
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves.

"Well!" said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his back, as
if he had made a decision. "I can't keep it dark any longer. I have got
something to tell you all. But I don't know quite how to begin."

"What do you mean?" said Frodo, looking at him anxiously. "Just this,
my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because you don't know how to say
good-bye. You meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come on
you sooner than you expected, and now you are making up your mind to go at
once. And you don't want to. We are very sorry for you."

Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of surprise was so

comical that they laughed. "Dear old Frodo!" said Pippin. "Did you really
think you had thrown dust in all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful
or clever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying
farewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We have constantly
heard you muttering: "Shall I ever look down into that valley again, I
wonder", and things like that. And pretending that you had come to the end
of your money, and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those
Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf."

"Good heavens!" said Frodo. "I thought I had been both careful and
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire discussing my
departure then?"

"But I must go," said Frodo. "It cannot be helped, dear friends. It is
wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you have
guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!"

"My dear and most beloved hobbits!" said Frodo deeply moved. "But I
could not allow it. I decided that long ago, too. You speak of danger, but
you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt, no there-and -back journey.

The Ring!" said Frodo, now completely amazed.

"Go on!" said Frodo faintly.

"After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I spied. But
you must admit that it was very intriguing, and I was only in my teens. I
must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the
old fellow's secret book."

"You have read his book!" cried Frodo. "Good heavens above! Is nothing
safe?"

"Not too safe, I should say," said Merry. "But I have only had one
rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I
wonder what became of it. I should like another look. Have you got it,
Frodo?"

"Where is he?" said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected a masked
and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard.

"Sam!" cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further, and
quite unable to decide whether he felt angry, amused, relieved, or merely
foolish.

"Yes, sir!" said Sam. "Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant no wrong
to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He has some sense,
mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no! lake someone as you can
trust. '

"But it does not seem that I can trust anyone," said Frodo. Sam looked
at him unhappily. "It all depends on what you want," put in Merry. "You can
trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you
can trust us to keep any secret of yours - closer than you keep it yourself.

But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off without a
word. We are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what
Gandalf has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds."

"I don't deny it," said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. "I
don't deny it, but I'll never believe you are sleeping again, whether you
snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure.

"Good! That's settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and company!"
they shouted; and they danced round him. Merry and Pippin began a song,
which they had apparently got ready for the occasion.

"Very good!" said Frodo. "But in that case there are a lot of things to
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for tonight at any rate."

"I don't know," answered Frodo. "I fear those Black Riders, and I am
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place to which
it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to wait. But I should
very much like to see Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed
when he heard that Gandalf had never appeared. It really depends on two
things. Flow soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how soon could
we

"It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy," said Frodo. "But
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?"

Frodo sat for a while in thought. "I have made up my mind," he said
finally. "I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going
by road: it would be safer to wait here than that. If I go through the
North-gate my departure from Buckland will be known at once, instead of
being secret for several days at least, as it might be. And what is more,
the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will certainly be watched,
whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. We don't know how many there
are; but there are at least two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is
to go off in a quite unexpected direction."

"Not quite," said Merry. It sounds very desperate, but I believe Frodo
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed at once.

"Oh yes they do!" said Merry. "The Brandybucks go in - occasionally
when the fit takes them. We have a private entrance. Frodo went in once,
long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when
the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet."

Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire,
nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from
Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine

Bridge. His task, according to the original plans of the conspirators, was
to stay behind and deal with inquisitive folk, and to keep up as long as
possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins was still living at Crickhollow. He
had even brought along some old clothes of Frodo's to help him in playing
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove.

"Excellent!" said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ’We could not
have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don't know whether
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk
a written message, in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we
have gone, that decides me. I am going into the Old Forest first thing
tomorrow.’

When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some time.

Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry was standing
there with a candle in one hand, and banging on the door with the other.

"All right! What is it?" said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered.

Here Fatty Bolger halted. "Good-bye, Frodo!" he said. "I wish you were
not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the
day is out. But good luck to you - today and every day!"

"If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be
lucky," said Frodo. "Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we shall

Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. "You had better lead on and find
that path," Frodo said to him. "Don't let us lose one another, or forget
which way the Hedge lies!"

Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, and if
he had been right to make the others come into this abominable wood. Merry
was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go.

But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy. The trees drew
close again on either side, and they could no longer see far ahead. Now
stronger than ever they felt again the ill will of the wood pressing on
them. So silent was it that the fall of their ponies' hoofs, rustling on
dead leaves and occasionally stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud in
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank
to a murmur.

He spoke cheerfully, and if he felt any great anxiety, he did not show
it. The others did not answer. They were depressed. A heavy weight was
settling steadily on Frodo's heart, and he regretted now with every step
forward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace of the trees. He
was, indeed, just about to stop and propose going back (if that was still
possible), when things took a new turn. The path stopped climbing, and
became for a while nearly level. The dark trees drew aside, and ahead they
could see the path going almost straight forward. Before them, but some
distance off, there stood a green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald
head out of the encircling wood. The path seemed to be making directly for
it.

Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front of him
Pippin fell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. "It's no good," he heard
Merry saying. "Can't go another step without rest. Must have nap. It's cool
under the willows. Less flies!"

Frodo did not like the sound of this. "Come on!" he cried. "We can't
have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first." But the others were
too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.

Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His head swam.
There now seemed hardly a sound in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing.
Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing, a soft fluttering as of a song
half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes
and saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree, old and hoary. Enormous it
looked, its sprawling branches going up like reaching arms with many
long-fingered hands, its knotted and twisted trunk gaping in wide fissures
that creaked faintly as the boughs moved. The leaves fluttering against the
bright sky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell upon the
grass.

Frodo lay for a while fighting with the sleep that was overpowering
him; then with an effort he struggled to his feel again. He felt a
compelling desire for cool water. "Wait for me, Sam," he stammered. "Must
bathe feet a minute."

He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to the edge,
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the jacket, and dragged him from under
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once
he woke, and coughed and spluttered.

"You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo," said Sam. "You shouldn't sit
in such a place, if you feel sleepy."

"What about the others?" Frodo asked. "I wonder what sort of dreams
they are having."

Frodo and Sam beat first upon the tree-trunk where Pippin had lain.

"What a foul thing to happen!" cried Frodo wildly. "Why did we ever
come into this dreadful Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow!" He
kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless of his own feet. A hardly
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter.

"I suppose we haven't got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?" asked
Sam.

"I brought a little hatchet for chopping firewood," said Frodo. "That
wouldn't be much use."

"We might," said Frodo doubtfully. "We might succeed in roasting Pippin
alive inside."

"Who? What?" shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other side of the
tree.

"Put it out! Put it out!" begged Merry. The branches of the willow
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading
outwards to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they
had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the river -valley and set up
ripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked at the
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of
why he did so, or what he hoped for, ran along the path crying help! help!
help! It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill
voice: it was blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a
clamour of leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate:
lost and witless.

Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both
stood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words (or so they
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song:

Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The leaves
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was another burst of song, and
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there appeared above the
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into view a man, or so it
seemed. At any rate he was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one,
slumping along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat
and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face was red
as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his
hands he carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white
water-lilies.

"Help!" cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their hands
stretched out.

"My friends are caught in the willow-tree," cried Frodo breathlessly.

’Come dear folk!" she said, taking Frodo by the hand. Faugh and be
merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River." Then lightly she passed them
and closing the door she turned her back to it, with her white arms spread
out across it. "Let us shut out the night!" she said. "For you are still
afraid, perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things.
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil."

The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and
smiled. "Fair lady Goldberry!" said Frodo at last, feeling his heart moved
with a joy that he did not understand. He stood as he had at times stood
enchanted by fair el ven- voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was
different: less keen and lofty was the delight, but deeper and nearer to
mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. "Fair lady Goldberry!" he said
again. "Now the joy that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to

"Fair lady!" said Frodo again after a while. "Tell me, if my asking
does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?"

Frodo looked at her questioningly. "He is, as you have seen him," she
said in answer to his look. "He is the Master of wood, water, and hill."

Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them tried to
muster the courage to ask one of the many questions he had meant to ask at
supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke:

He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one more
question: the one he most desired to have answered. "Tell us, Master," he
said, 'about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before."

In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then he saw the
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall
of rock, pierced by a dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that
he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circle of
hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a
pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood
the figure of a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a moment above
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the
dark plain below came the crying of fell voices, and the howling of many
wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a light flashed from the staff that he
wielded. A mighty eagle swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed
and

the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it
was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East.
"Black Riders!" thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs
still echoing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever again have the
courage to leave the safety of these stone walls. He lay motionless, still
listening; but all was now silent, and at last he turned and fell asleep
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream.

They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window, and found
himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to
see turf right up to the walls, turf all pocked with hoof-prints. Actually
his view was screened by a tall line of beans on poles; but above and far
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a
pale morning: in the East, behind long clouds like lines of soiled wool
stained red at the edges, lay glimmering deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of
rain to come; but the light was broadening quickly, and the red flowers on
the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves.

As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it was
flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear voice of Goldberry singing
up above them. They could hear few words, but it seemed plain to them that
the song was a rain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the
tale of a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The
hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his heart, and blessed
the kindly weather, because it delayed them from departing. The thought of
going had been heavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he guessed
now

The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds rolled
up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could
be seen all round the house but falling water. Frodo stood near the open
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and

As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest,
apart from themselves, indeed to feel themselves as the strangers where all
other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out of his talk was Old
Man Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed more
than

Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many days had passed
Frodo could not tell. Ele did not feel either hungry or tired, only filled
with wonder. The stars shone through the window and the silence of the
heavens seemed to be round him. He spoke at last out of his wonder and a

they had imagined. "There's earth under his old feet, and clay on his
fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both his eyes are open," said Tom. It was
also clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some
fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo.

Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears
than he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down,
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders.

"Show me the precious Ring!" he said suddenly in the midst of the
story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from his
pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom.

Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air - and it
vanished with a flash. Frodo gave a cry - and Tom leaned forward and handed
it back to him with a smile.

Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one who has
lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the same and
weighed the same: for that Ring had always seemed to Frodo to weigh
strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He
was

Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked
an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his own ring all
right, for Merry was staring blankly at his chair, and obviously could not
see him. He got up and crept quietly away from the fireside towards the
outer door.

"Hey there!" cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing look in
his shining eyes. "Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you a-going? Old Tom
Bombadil's not as blind as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand's
more fair without it. Come back! Leave your game and sit down beside me!
We

Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he came
and sat down again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the Sun would shine
tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and setting out would be hopeful.
But they would do well to start early; for weather in that country was a
thing that even Tom could not be sure of for long, and it would change
sometimes quicker than he could change his jacket. "I am no weather-master,"
he said; 'nor is aught that goes on two legs."

That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or out of
them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet singing running in his
mind; a song that seemed to come like a pale light behind a grey
rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver,
until at last it was rolled back, and a far green country opened before him
under a swift sunrise.

They rode off along a path that wound away from behind the house, and
went slanting up towards the north end of the hill -brow under which it
sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their ponies up the last steep
slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped.

Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts. ’Speed
now, fair guests!’ she said. "And hold to your purpose! North with the wind
in the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the Sun
shines!" And to Frodo she said: "Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merry
meeting!"

But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony,
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope behind the
hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.
The air grew warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside, and
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when
they reached the bottom of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small
and slender like a sunlit flower against the sky: she was standing still
watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked
she gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished
behind the hill .

"Splendid!" said Frodo. "If we make as good going this afternoon as we
have done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and
be jogging on in search of a camping place." But even as he spoke he turned
his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and
looked down upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green mounds,
and on some were standing stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of
green gums.

wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam
was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley
seemed

to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign. On either side
ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he guessed that they
were at last approaching the gap in the hills, the north-gate of the
Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free.

There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the stones
shouting wildly: "Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!" The pony bolted into the mist
and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry:
"Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!" It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under the
great stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off in the
direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill.

As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and more
frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it seemed faint
and far ahead and high above him. "Frodo! Hoy!" came the thin voices out of
the mist: and then a cry that sounded like help, help! often repeated,
ending with a last help! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut
short. He stumbled forward with all the speed he could towards the cries;
but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that
it was impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time to be
climbing up and up.

"No!" said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell
on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he
looked

hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid
hobbit, wailing for some final and desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo
was neither very fat nor very timid; indeed, though he did not know it,

Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. The voice
seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin,
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad
but horrible sounds, strings of words would now and again shape themselves:
grim, hard, cold words, heartless and miserable. The night was railing
against the morning of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the
warmth for which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while
the song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived that it
had changed into an incantation:

At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by the
incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He wondered if he
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find
some way out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, grieving
for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive himself. Gandalf would
admit that there had been nothing else he could do.

Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once
back into his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of
the fog, came the memory of the house down under the Hill, and of Tom
singing. He remembered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small
desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil! and with that name his voice
seemed to grow strong: it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber
echoed as if to drum and trumpet.

There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could hear his heart
beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was
coming down through the ground or through thick walls, an answering voice
singing:

There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and falling, and
suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain light of day. A low
door -like opening appeared at the end of the chamber beyond Frodo's feet;
and there was Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of
the sun rising red behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the
faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo. They did not stir, but the
sickly hue had left them. They looked now as if they were only very deeply
asleep.

’Come, friend Frodo!" said Tom. "Let us get out on to clean grass! You
must help me bear them."

Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left the
barrow for the last time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still,
like a wounded spider, in a heap of fallen earth. Tom went back in again,
and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he
was

To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed
their eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They looked about in amazement,
first at Frodo, and then at Tom standing large as life on the barrow-top
above them; and then at themselves in their thin white rags, crowned and
belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.

"What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?"

"I thought that I was lost," said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!"

He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him
Frodo saw him running away southwards along the green hollow between
their

"Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from?"
asked Frodo.

Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the great
stones standing like a gate, and before long they came to the northern gap
and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry
journey with Tom Bombadil trotting gaily beside them, or before them, on
Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his girth promised. Tom
sang

be seen. "Well, here we are again at last!" said Frodo. "I suppose we
haven’t lost more than two days by my short cut through the Forest! But
perhaps the delay will prove useful - it may have put them off our trail."

"It may be all we could wish," said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shire
all the same. Don't make yourselves too much at home ! Please remember -all
of you - that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill,
if any name must be given."

It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the village.
They came to the West-gate and found it shut, but at the door of the lodge
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and fetched a lantern and
looked over the gate at them in surprise.

"We are making for the inn here," answered Frodo. "We are journeying
east and cannot go further tonight."

"Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem a good
place to discuss them," said Frodo, not liking the look of the man or the
tone of his voice.

He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see
in the lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them curiously. He was
glad to hear the gate clang to behind them, as they rode forward. He
wondered why the man was so suspicious, and whether any one had been
asking

"What's wrong with the inn?" said Frodo. "Tom Bombadil recommended it.
I expect it's homelike enough inside."

They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them standing in the
yard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a
short fat man with a bald head and a red face. He had a white apron on, and
was bustling out of one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden
with full mugs.

’Can we—' began Frodo.

"Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck," said Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My
name is Underhill."

So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their supper
(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it
would be too stuffy. "I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit, and
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and don't
forget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret, and are still on the
high-road and not very far from the Shire!"

The company was in the big common-room of the inn. The gathering was
large and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used to the light.

used in the Shire. There were several Underhills from Saddle, and as they
could not imagine sharing a name without being related, they took Frodo to
their hearts as a long-lost cousin.

The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, and Frodo
soon found that some explanation of what he was doing would have to be

At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really wanted to
write a book, and had had many ears, he would have learned enough for
several chapters in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given
a whole list of names, beginning with "Old Barliman here', to whom he could
go for further information. But after a time, as Frodo did not show any sign
of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about
doings in the Shire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soon
found himself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around.

The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, and it did not at
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk could hardly beg for lodgings
in hobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and Pippin, who were now
feeling quite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in the Shire.
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the
roof of the Town Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the
fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out
like a floured dumpling. But there were several questions asked that made
Frodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been in
the Shire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who
they were related to.

Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather-beaten man,
sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also listening intently to the
hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard in front of him, and was smoking a
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs were stretched out before him,
showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much
wear and were now caked with mud. A travel -stained cloak of heavy dark-
green

’Who is that?" Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whisper to Mr.
Butterbur. "I don't think you introduced him?"

Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had heard or
guessed all that had been said. Presently, with a wave of his hand and a
nod, he invited Frodo to come over and sit by him. As Frodo drew near be
threw back his hood, showing a shaggy head of dark hair necked with grey,
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes.

"He did," said Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under the
stare of those keen eyes.

smile, seeing Frodo's glance. "And there have been even stranger travellers
through Bree lately," he went on, watching Frodo's face.

Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no further
sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be fixed on Pippin. To his alarm
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success
with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance.

Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most of the local
hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those funny people away beyond
the River; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and
had probably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring
the name of Baggins to their minds, especially if there had been inquiries
in Bree after that name.

Frodo fidgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evidently much
enjoying the attention he was getting, and had become quite forgetful of
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even
mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous.

Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. The attention
of Pippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the hobbits looked at Frodo and
laughed and clapped, thinking that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as
was good for him.

Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as was his habit
when making a speech) fingering the things in his pocket. He felt the Ring
on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on
and vanish out of the silly situation. It seemed to him, somehow, as if me
suggestion came to him from outside, from someone or something a the room.
He resisted the temptation firmly, and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if
to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At
any rate it gave him no inspiration. He spoke 'a few suitable words', as
they would have said in the Shire: We are all very much gratified by the
kindness of your reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will
help to renew the old ties of friendship between the Shire and Bree; and
then he hesitated and coughed.

For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began a
ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of (and indeed rather proud
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that is
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a
few words of it are now, as a rule, remembered.

There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good voice, and the song
tickled their fancy. "Where's old Barley?" they cried. "He ought to hear
this. Bob ought to learn his cat the fiddle, and then we'd have a dance."

They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his song again,
while many of them joined in; for the tune was well known, and they were
quick at picking up words. It was now Frodo's turn to feel pleased with
himself. He capered about on the table; and when he came a second time to
the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for
he came down, bang, into a tray full of mugs, and slipped, and rolled off
the table with a crash, clatter, and bump! The audience all opened their
mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer
disappeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the floor
without leaving a hole !

Frodo felt a fool. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled away under

the tables to the dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall and took off the Ring. How
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he
had been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and that somehow it had
slipped on when he stuck out his hand with a jerk to save his fall. For a
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out.

"I don't know what you mean," said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed.

"What about?" asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name.

"A matter of some importance - to us both," answered Strider, looking
Frodo in the eye. "You may hear something to your advantage."

"Very well," said Frodo, trying to appear unconcerned. "I'll talk to
you later."

"Of course there's a mistake!" said Frodo. "I haven't vanished. Here I
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer."

He came forward into the firelight; but most of the company backed
away,, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied
by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly under the tables after
he had fallen. Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then and
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves.

Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall.

"I am very sorry to have caused any trouble," said Frodo. "It was quite
unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident."

"Certainly!" said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered how many
private talks he would have before he got to bed, and what they would
reveal. Were these people all in league against him? He began to suspect
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs.

Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no
light. Merry was not there, and the fire had burned low. It was not until
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting
in a chair by the door!

"You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe," said
Frodo. "What have you to say?"

"What do you mean?" asked Frodo sharply.

"And what will that be, pray?" said Frodo. He suspected now that he had
fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably that he had brought
only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he
could not spare any of it.

"No more than you can afford," answered Strider with a slow smile, as
if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. "Just this: you must take me along with you,
until I wish to leave you."

"Oh, indeed!" replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. "Even if
I wanted another companion, I should not agree to any such thing, until I
knew a good deal more about you, and your business."

"Go on then!" said Frodo. "What do you know?"

"I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree," said Frodo
angrily, 'and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr. Strider may
have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but if so, I should
advise him to explain it."

I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted to find him
quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret
that concerned me and my friends.

"Now, don't mistake me!" he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam
jumped up with a scowl. "I shall take more care of the secret than you do.

There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: "I ought to
have guessed it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us," he said. "And the
landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join the
company? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have
stayed quiet in here."

"Do you think he ' began Frodo.

"No, I don't think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does not
altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort." Frodo gave him a puzzled
look. "Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?" said Strider with a
curl of his lip and a queer gleam in his eye. "But I hope we shall get to

"It was sheer accident!" interrupted Frodo.

"Hardly more than it was already," said Frodo. "I knew these horsemen
were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to
have gone away."

"What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?"
said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints.

There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was confused
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master; and at last he
broke out:

"With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I'd say no! This Strider here, he warns
and he says take care; and I say yes to that, and let's begin with him. He
comes out of the Wild, and I never heard no good of such folk. He knows
something, that's plain, and more than I like; but it's no reason why we
should let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he
puts it."

Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam,
but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away.
"No," he said slowly. "I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as
you choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?
Who are you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how
do

"And what has that got to do with me?" asked Frodo.

"Indeed! Let's have it then!" said Frodo, unwisely interrupting.

"He said it? And who was he?" asked Frodo eagerly.

"Well, what have you done?" said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow
unravelling of Butterbur's thoughts.

"A letter for me from Gandalf!" cried Frodo.

"It is," said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that letter at once,
and explain why you never sent it. That's what you came to tell me, I
suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point."

"What do you mean?" asked Frodo.

"He's here with my leave," said Frodo. "He came to offer me his help."

"I'm sorry I can't explain it all," answered Frodo. "I am tired and
very worried, and it's a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought to
warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house. These
Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from '

"Save us!" cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evidently was
known to him. "That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time." "It
is," said Frodo. "Are you still willing to help me?" "I am," said Mr.

"Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet," said Frodo.

"In any case we must be called at dawn," said Frodo. "We must get off
as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please."

"I don’t know," said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgotten all
about Merry, and it was getting late. "I am afraid he is out. He said
something about going for a breath of air."

"Well?" said Strider. "When are you going to open that letter?" Frodo
looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to be
Gandalf s. Inside, written in the wizard's strong but graceful script, was
the following message:

Dear Frodo,

Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam.
"Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!" he said. "He deserves
roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in
Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he
was going into great danger."

Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf s
second postscript. "Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf s friend at
once?" he asked. "It would have saved time."

There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesitation. "I
believed that you were a friend before the letter came," he said, 'or at
least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight, but never
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand."

"Did the verses apply to you then?" asked Frodo. "I could not make out
what they were about. But how did you know that they were in Gandalf s
letter, if you have never seen it?"

’When did you last see Gandalf?" asked Frodo. "Do you know where he is,
or what he is doing?"

"Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it - with
Gandalf's absence, I mean?" asked Frodo.

At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the
passage. Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob. He shut the door
hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They stared at him in
alarm for a moment before he gasped: "I have seen them, Frodo! I have seen
them! Black Riders!"

"Black Riders!" cried Frodo. "Where?"

"Which way did it go?" asked Strider, suddenly and sharply. Merry
started, noticing the stranger for the first time. "Go on!" said Frodo.

"We seem to have enemies all round," said Frodo. "What are we to do?"

While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that
had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and pondering Gandalf's
letter when Strider and Nob returned.

Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They pushed a low
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo saw that the
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred the heavy inside shutters and drew the
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.

"Jumped over the Moon!" chuckled Merry as he rolled himself in his
blanket. "Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see.
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence."

In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, as if some
sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert
in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the fire, which had been
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement.

Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled with
the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The wind seemed to be curling
round the house and shaking it; and far off he heard a horn blowing wildly.

Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach Rivendell
on foot, pursued by mounted enemies? They might as well set out for the
Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was
weighing up their strength and courage.

"Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen," he said at last,
thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. "We should not go
much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I was going to
walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count
on getting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take
with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or
forced to go round-about, far out of the direct way. How much are you
prepared to carry on your backs?"

"Can't anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?" asked Frodo. "Can't we get a
couple of ponies in the village, or even one just for the baggage? I don't
suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy them," he added,
doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it.

"Bill Ferny?" said Frodo. "Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beast
bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?"

After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get together
further supplies for the longer journey they were now expecting. It was
close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By that time the whole of
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of
the black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that
Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as
would last for many uneventful years. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and
Staddle, and many even from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road
to

They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. Butterbur with
many thanks. "I hope we shall meet again some day, when things are merry
once more," said Frodo. "I should like nothing better than to stay in your
house in peace for a while."

They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd.
Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted. But
Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo;
next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony, which was
laden with as much of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; but
already it looked less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its
fortunes. Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of
them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. "Apples for walking, and a pipe

The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped out of
doors, or popped over walls and fences, as they passed. But as they drew
near to the further gate, Frodo saw a dark ill-kept house behind a thick
hedge: the last house in the village. In one of the windows he caught a
glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once.

As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that
far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it flashed and faded many
times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off.

Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white
flashes, and against them the tall dark figure of Strider, standing silent
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.

’What do you mean?" asked Frodo.

"What do you advise us to do?" asked Frodo.

Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There was a frost
in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed,
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used
to much walking on short commons - shorter at any rate than what in the
Shire they would have thought barely enough to keep them on their legs.
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been.

"Very odd," said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is
actually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinning process will not go on
indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith."

On the western flank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow, at
the bottom of which there was a bowl -shaped dell with grassy sides. There
they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs and luggage. The
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the
crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last
slope had been steep and rocky.

On the flat under-side Frodo saw some scratches: "There seems to he a
stroke, a dot, and three more strokes," he said.

"I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they may
mean," said Frodo "It would be a great comfort to know that he was on the
way, in front of us or behind us."

"A fortnight!" said Frodo. "A lot may happen in that time."

In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully realized his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in
the quiet and beloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful Road, leading
back westward - to his home. Suddenly he was aware that two black specks
were moving slowly along it, going westward; and looking again he saw that
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched
Strider's arm.

At once Strider flung himself on the ground behind the ruined circle,
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside.

Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and peered
through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer bright,
for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now
overtaken the sun, as it began to go down. They could all see the black
specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain;
yet something told them that there, far below, were Black Riders assembling
on the Road beyond the foot of the hill.

"Is there no escape then?" said Frodo, looking round wildly. "If I move
I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!"

"I don't see how our food can be made to last," said Frodo. "We have
been careful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no feast; but
we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks still to go, and
perhaps more."

shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling
stars. Frodo and his companions huddled round the fire, wrapped in every
garment and blanket they possessed; but Strider was content with a single
cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe.

"I do indeed," answered Strider. "So also does Frodo, for it concerns
us closely." Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring into the
fire.

"I know only the little that Gandalf has told me," said Frodo slowly.
"Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is
Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land
of '

Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo and Pippin
remained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill
intently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping
over his heart, now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell.

"Did you see anything?" asked Frodo, springing to his feet.

For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with their
backs turned to the wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled
them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or movement in the night.
Frodo

three or four tall black figures were standing there on the slope,
looking down on them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes
in the deep shade behind them. Frodo thought that he heard a faint hiss as
of venomous breath and felt a thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly
advanced.

Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his
companions; he was quaking as if he was bitter cold, but his terror was
swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. Fie did not forget
the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf; but something seemed to be
compelling him to disregard all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt
that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger. Fie could not speak. Fie
felt Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled
for a while; but resistance became unbearable, and at last he slowly drew
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand.

Two of the figures halted. The third was taller than the others: his hair
was long and gleaming and on his helm was a crown. In one hand he held a
long sword, and in the other a knife; both the knife and the hand that held
it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo.

At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and he heard
himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at
the feet of his enemy. A shrill cry rang out in the night; and he felt a
pain like a dart of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Strider leaping

out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last
effort Frodo, dropping his sword, slipped the Ring from his finger and
closed his right hand tight upon it.

When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.

He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. His
three companions were bending over him. "What has happened? Where is the
pale king?" he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to
answer for a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he
gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes
coming towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He
heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the
grass with his sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and
lay him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now a good while
ago.

Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of the shadows. They
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down
swiftly at his side.

When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of concern, and
shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with it.

"Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!" he said. Then he got up and
walked away, and called Sam to him. "I think I understand things better
now," he said in a low voice. "There seem only to have been five of the
enemy. Why they were not all here, I don't know; but I don't think they
expected to be resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not
far, I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape. They
are only waiting, because they think that their purpose is almost
accomplished, and that the Ring cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that

"You must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had
guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and
I think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his enemies
expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am
away!" He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness.

Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and a
deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side. His
friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound. The night
passed slowly and wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky, and the dell was
filling with grey light, when Strider at last returned.

"Look!" he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a black cloak
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there
was a slash. "This was the stroke of Frodo's sword," he said. "The only hurt
that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish
that pierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the name of
Elbereth."

"And more deadly to Frodo was this!" He stooped again and lifted up a
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw
that near the end its edge was notched and the point was broken off. But
even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only
the hilt in Strider's hand. "Alas!" he cried. "It was this accursed knife
that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in healing to match such evil
weapons. But I will do what I can."

He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger -hilt laid it on his
knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it
aside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words the others could
not catch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out the long leaves of a
plant.

He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some power over the wound, for
Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in his side;
but the life did not return to his arm, and he could not raise or use his
hand. He bitterly regretted his foolishness, and reproached himself for
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he
would remain maimed for life, and how they would now manage to continue
their journey. He fell too weak to stand.

As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the greater
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo on the pony. In
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its new masters,
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must have been very hard for the
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life.

They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the
Road, but. it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed
fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm, especially at night,
while fire would be some protection for them all. It was also his plan to
shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: east
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards.

land before them sloped away southwards, but it was wild and pathless;
bushes and stunted trees grew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in
between. The grass was scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the
thickets were faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey
was slow and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads down,
and

Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again,
but he did not speak of it for a long time. Four days passed, without the
ground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop
slowly

The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and the perilous
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here and there upon
heights and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone, and the
ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo, who was not walking, had

time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his journey
and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had happened. Frodo
guessed that they were now in the same region, and wondered if by chance
they would pass near the spot.

'and many more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell." "Have
you often been to Rivendell?" said Frodo. "I have," said Strider. "I dwelt
there once, and still I return when I may.

The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick
their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled
rocks. As long as they could they avoided climbing for Frodo's sake, and
because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales.

That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock -wall behind them,
in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff. Frodo was
restless. The cold and wet had made his wound more painful than ever, and
the ache and sense of deadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks
of rock, water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling fall of a loosened
stone. He felt that black shapes were advancing to smother him; but when he
sat up he saw nothing but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking
his pipe, and watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream,
in which he walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire, but it seemed
faint and dim, less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking
over the hedge.

They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so they

often despaired of getting their pony up, or indeed of finding a path for
themselves, burdened as they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were
all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They had climbed on to a
narrow saddle between two higher points, and the land fell steeply away
again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the
ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder felt
as if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks about him seemed
shadowy and dim.

"We cannot go any further," said Merry to Strider. "I am afraid this
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we
to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him in Ri vendell, if we ever
get there?"

"Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy," said Strider,

Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small fire down under
the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as
if stone had once been quarried there. They sat huddled together. The wind
blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning
and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark wings
were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that sought
him in all the hollows of the hill s.

As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed slowly down
the southern side of the ridge; but the way was much easier than they had
expected, for the slope was far less steep on this side, and before long
Frodo was able to ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an
unexpected talent for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many
jolts as possible. The spirits of the party rose again. Even Frodo felt
better in the morning light, but every now and again a mist seemed to
obscure his sight, and he passed his hands over his eyes.

The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right again
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam and
Strider came behind, one on each side of Frodo's pony, for the path was now
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone
very far before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both
looked terrified.

Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared.

Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the hobbits,
and then even Frodo laughed. "Well!" he said. "We are forgetting our family
history! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf,
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit."

"I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!" said Pippin. He knew
the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact
he had never more than half believed it. Even now he looked at the stone
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them
to life again.

They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder of
Bilbo's first successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was warm
and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be lifting a little.
They rested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs.

"Not since Weathertop," said Frodo. The others looked at him. "Don't
worry about me!" he added. "I feel much better, but I don't think I could
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory."

Sam muttered something inaudible. "It's out of his own head, of
course," said Frodo. "I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.
First he was a conspirator, now he's a jester. He'll end up by becoming a
wizard - or a warrior!"

"There!" said Merry. "That must be the stone that marked the place
where the trolls' gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo's share, I
wonder, Frodo?"

Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought home no
treasure more perilous, nor less easy to pan with. "None at all," he said.

That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!" said Frodo, listening
intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not, but they all
remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of pursuit for so long
that any sound from behind seemed ominous and unfriendly. But Strider was
now leaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his ear, and a
look of joy on his face.

The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. Clearer
and nearer now the bells jingled, and clippety-clip came the quick trotting
feet. Suddenly into view below came a white horse, gleaming in the shadows,
running swiftly. In the dusk its headstall flickered and flashed, as if it
were studded with gems like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behind
him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in the
wind of his speed. To Frodo it appeared that a white light was shining
through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil.

"Hail, and well met at last!" said the Elf-lord to Frodo. "I was sent
from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the
road."

"Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?" cried Frodo joyfully.

While Glorfindel was speaking the shades of evening deepened. Frodo
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began to sink the
mist before his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a shadow was coming
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm.

Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently

He searched the wound on Frodo's shoulder with his fingers, and his
face grew graver, as if what he learned disquieted him. But Frodo felt the
chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down from his
shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemed
to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn. He saw his
friends' faces more clearly again, and a measure of new hope and strength
returned.

"No, he will not!" said Frodo. "I shall not ride him, if I am to be
carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind in
danger."

Glorfindel smiled. "I doubt very much," he said, 'if your friends would
be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would follow you and
leave us in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that
brings us all in peril."

To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's
white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'
burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and for a time made good speed;
but the hobbits began to find it hard to keep up with the swift tireless
feet of the Elf. On he led them, into the mouth of darkness, and still on
under the deep clouded night. There was neither star nor moon. Not until the
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that

time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by the
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream.

But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with
weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs. Frodo's
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows of
ghostly grey. He almost welcomed the coming of night, for then the world
seemed less pale and empty.

’Ride forward! Ride!" cried Glorfindel to Frodo.

At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the wind along the
last lap of the Road. At the same moment the black horses leaped down the
hill in pursuit, and from the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had
heard filling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It was
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends out from the trees and

rocks away on the left four other Riders came flying. Two rode towards
Frodo: two galloped madly towards the Ford to cut off his escape. They
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as
their courses converged with his.

Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no longer
see his friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even their great
steeds were no match in speed for the white elf-horse of Glorfindel. He
looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the
Ford before he was cut off by the others that had lain in ambush. He could
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black
cloaks, and they were robed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, and they
called to him with fell voices.

Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No
cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the horse's mane. The wind
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a
flash of white fire, the elf-horse speeding as if on wings, passed right
before the face of the foremost Rider.

Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford.

But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the horse
halted and turned about neighing fiercely. There were Nine Riders at the
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before the threat of their
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossing as
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge of Rivendell, if once the
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt.
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse.

Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It checked at
the water and reared up. With a great effort Frodo sat upright and
brandished his sword.

"Go back!" he cried. "Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow me no
more! ' His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The Riders
halted, but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him
with a harsh and chilling laughter. "Come back! Come back!" they called. "To

"By Elbereth and L®thien the Fair," said Frodo with a last effort,
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!"

Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in
his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his
tongue cleave to his mouth, and his heart labouring. His sword broke and
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore.

At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise of loud
waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the river below him rise, and
down along its course there came a plumed cavalry of waves. White flames
seemed to Frodo to flicker on their crests and he half fancied that he saw
amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three
Riders that were still in the midst of the Ford were overwhelmed: they
disappeared, buried suddenly under angry foam. Those that were behind drew
back in dismay.

With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed to him
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure
of white light; and behind it ran small shadowy forms waving flames, that
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world.

The black horses were filled with madness, and leaping forward in
terror they bore their riders into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo
felt himself falling, and the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more.

Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that he
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge
of memory. Or perhaps he had been ill? But the ceiling looked strange; it
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longer
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the sound of a
waterfall.

"Gandalf!" cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window.

"Yes," he said, "I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after
all the absurd things you have done since you left home." Frodo lay down
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did
not think he would get the better of an argument. He was fully awake now,
and the memory of his journey was returning: the disastrous 'short cut'
through the Old Forest the 'accident' at The Prancing Pony ; and his madness
in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his
arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft
puffs of Gandalf s pipe, as he blew white smoke -rings out of the window.

"Where's Sam?" Frodo asked at length. "And are the others all right?"

"What happened at the Ford?" said Frodo. "It all seemed so dim somehow;
and it still does.’

"You seem to know a great deal already," said Frodo. "I have not spoken
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?"

"You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo," said Gandalf gently, 'and
it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory. Do not worry!
Though I said "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and
of the others. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such
dangers, still bearing the Ring."

"We should never have done it without Strider," said Frodo. "But we
needed you. I did not know what to do without you."

"But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are quite as
tiring,’ said Frodo. ’I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things
that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at
least."

"You?" cried Frodo.

"Yes," said Frodo, 'it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we
met Glorfindel."

"I am glad," said Frodo. "For I have become very fond of Strider. Well,
fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he is strange,
and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I didn't know that
any of the Big People were like that. I thought, well, that they were just
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked
like Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except
perhaps the Breelanders."

"Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old
Kings?" said Frodo in wonder. "I thought they had all vanished long ago. I
thought he was only a Ranger."

"Only a Ranger!" cried Gandalf. "My dear Frodo, that is just what the
Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people, the Men of
the West. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the
days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at
rest."

"I suppose not," said Frodo. "But so far my only thought has been to
get here; and I hope I shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has
been as much as I want."

’I don't know." Frodo answered. "They don't feel at all: which is an
improvement, but'— he made an effort— "I can move my arm again a little.
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold," he added, touching his left
hand with his right.

"Days?" said Frodo.

Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that
had vanished in Strider's hands. "Don't be alarmed!" said Gandalf. "It is
gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very
reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would
quickly have been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen
days.’

"What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. "What were the Riders
trying to do?’

"Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!" said Frodo
faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I should
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!"

"I know," said Frodo. "They were terrible to behold! But why could we

"I haven't any courage to keep up," said Frodo, 'but I am not worried
at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me the end of the
affair at the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be content for the
present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think; but I shan't be

Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo.

"And is that the end of the Black Riders?" asked Frodo.

"Who made the flood?" asked Frodo.

"Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: 'the tremendous
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and all. But
now we are safe!"

Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. "Yes, you
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to
celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in
places of honour."

"Splendid!" said Frodo. "It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble
and show me so much kindness.’

"Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. "I wonder where he is. I wish he was
here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow
jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that he fell fast
asleep.

Frodo was now safe in the Fast Homely House east of the Sea. That house
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, 'a perfect house, whether you like food
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or
a pleasant mixture of them all'. Merely to be there was a cure for
weariness, fear, and sadness.

As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that he no

At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came in. He ran
to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it gently
and then he blushed and turned hastily away.

"Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo.

"It's warm!" said Sam. "Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so
cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried, turning
round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. ’It's fine to see
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking."

"I am ready," said Frodo. "Let's go and look for the rest of the
party!"

"I know what you have been doing, Sam," said Frodo, taking his arm.
"But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart's content. Come
on, guide me round the corners!"

"Hurray!" cried Pippin, springing up. "Here is our noble cousin! Make
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!"

"Hush!" said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. "Evil
things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should not name
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of
Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’

"I feel like singing myself," laughed Frodo. "Though at the moment I
feel more like eating and drinking!’

Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of
whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were
revealed

In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall,
there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look upon,
and so like was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that
she was one of his close kindred. Young she was and yet not so. The braids
of her dark hair were touched by no frost, her white arms and clear face
were flawless and smooth, and the light of stars was in her bright eyes,
grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge
were in her glance, as of one who has known many things that the years
bring. Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver.

So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen; Arwen,
daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of L®thien had
come on earth again; and she was called Undumiel, for she was the Evenstar
of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin, in Lurien
beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Rivendell to her
father's house. But her brothers, Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon
errantry: for they rode often far afield with the Rangers of the North,
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the ores.

Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find that he
had a seat at Elrond' s table among all these folk so high and fair. Though
he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several cushions, he felt very
small, and rather out of place; but that feeling quickly passed. The feast
was merry and the food all that his hunger could desire. It was some time
before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours.

He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait
on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of
honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper
end of one of the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of
Strider.

Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was white, nearly as white as the
snow-white cloth of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him.

"Frodo Baggins at your service and your family"s," said Frodo
correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. "Am I right in
guessing that you are the Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the great
Thorin Oaken shield?"

"Quite right," answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions and
courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. "And I do not ask, for I
have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery."

"Thank you very much,’ said Frodo.

"I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet," said Frodo
politely.

Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but Frodo
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring,
seemed small and far-away and unimportant, while Gluin had much to tell of
events in the northern regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn
the Old, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men, and to their
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither ore nor wolf dared to go.

"And what of your own people?" asked Frodo.

And with that Gluin embarked on a long account of the doings of the
Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have found so polite a listener; for
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject,
though actually he soon got rather lost among the strange names of people
and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to
hear that Dbin was still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having
passed his two hundred and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich.

"And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?" asked Frodo.

Gluin began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo
about their great labours in Dale and under the Mountain. "We have done
well," he said. "But in metalwork we cannot rival our fathers, many of
whose, secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot
again make mail or blade to match those that were made before the dragon
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should
see the waterways of Dale, Frodo, and the fountains, and the pools! You
should see the stone-paved roads of many colours! And the halls and

"I will come and see them, if ever I can," said Frodo. "How surprised
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!"

Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. "You were very fond of Bilbo were you
not?" he asked.

"Yes," answered Frodo. 1 would rather see him than all the towers and
palaces in the world."

Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. "This is the Hall of Fire'
said the wizard. "Here you will hear many songs and tales-if you can keep
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people
come here who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all
the year round, but there is little other light."

As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him, elvish
minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall filled, and Frodo
looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were gathered together;
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly
he noticed, not far from the further end of the fire, a small dark figure
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on the
ground was a drinking-cup and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was
ill

Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent figure. "Awake little
master, he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him.
"Now at last the hour has come that you have wished for, Frodo," he said.
"Here is a friend that you have long missed."

"Bilbo!" cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward.

"Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. "So you have got here at last. I

"Why weren't you there?" cried Frodo. "And why haven't I been allowed
to see you before?"

"Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this is
the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ he said, cocking an
eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness
that Frodo could see. "Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want
to know, you have all come out from your feast too soon, and you have
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck over a line or
two, and was thinking about them; but now I don't suppose I shall ever get
them right. There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be
driven clean out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to
help me. Where is he?"

In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious
of the mirth and music in the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of
himself. When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the
Road or in the country on either side; but somehow he had steered all the
time towards Ri vendell. "I got here without much adventure," he said, 'and
after a rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't
travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here I
have been. I have done this and that. I have written some more of my book.
And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to
please me, I think; for, of course, they aren't really good enough for
Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just
is. A remarkable place altogether.

"And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do no good
to you or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again." Odd sort of
remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let
things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound." He paused and
looked at Frodo doubtfully.

"Yes, I've got it," answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. "It
looks just the same as ever it did."

When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the Ring had been
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out.
Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodo quickly drew back the Ring. To his
distress and amazement he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a
shadow seemed to have fallen between them, and through it he found himself
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.
He felt a desire to strike him.

The music and singing round them seemed to falter and a silence fell.
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. "I
understand now," he said. "Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have come in
for this burden: sorry about everything. Don't adventures ever have an end?

Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly a shred

of memory. The light and music of Rivendell was about him again. Bilbo
smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo
could tell-aided and corrected now and again by Sam-was of the greatest
interest to him, from the felling of the least tree to the pranks of the
smallest child in Hobbiton. They were so deep in the doings of the Four
Farthings that they did not notice the arrival of a man clad in dark green
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile.

"Strider!" said Frodo. "You seem to have a lot of names."

"And why do you call him D®nadan?’ asked Frodo.

Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen asleep. He
was alone and felt rather forlorn' although all about him the folk of
Rivendell were gathered. But those near him were silent, intent upon the
music of the voices and the instruments, and they gave no heed to anything
else. Frodo began to listen.

The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that Bilbo was
seated on his stool in a circle of listeners, who were smiling and
applauding.

He got up and came towards Frodo. "Well, that's over," he said in a low
voice. "It went off better than I expected. I don't often get asked for a
second hearing. What did you think of it?"

"I am not going to try and guess," said Frodo smiling.

"I don't know," said Frodo. "It seemed to me to fit somehow, though I
can't explain. I was half asleep when you began, and it seemed to follow on
from something that I was dreaming about. I didn't understand that it was
really you speaking until near the end."

"Can we?’ said Frodo.

They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made for the
doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a smile on his face. In
spite of his delight in Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of regret as they
passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped over the threshold a
single clear voice rose in song.

Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in his chair and
the fire was on his face like summer -light upon the trees. Near him sat the
Lady Arwen. To his surprise Frodo saw that Aragorn stood beside her; his
dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed to be clad in elven-mail, and a
star shone on his breast. They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed
to Frodo that Arwen turned towards him, and the light of her eyes fell on
him from afar and pierced his heart.

He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the gar dens
and looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen. There they sat for some
while, looking through the window at the bright stars above the
steep-climbing woods, and talking softly. They spoke no more of the small
news of the Shire far away, nor of the dark shadows and perils that
encompassed them, but of the fair things they had seen in the world
together, of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the gentle fall of the
bright year in the woods.

"Quite right, Sam," laughed Bilbo. "You can trot off and tell Gandalf
that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been good
to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good
talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to
see your chapters of our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I think, and
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!"

Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along
the terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun
rise above the far mountains, and shine down. Slanting through the thin
silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the woven
nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush. Sam walked beside him, saying
nothing, but sniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder
in his eyes at the great heights in the East. The snow was white upon their
peaks.

"I feel ready for anything," answered Frodo. "But most of all I should
like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like to get into
those pine- woods up there." He pointed away far up the side of Rivendell to
the north.

Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back
to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten, trotted
Sam.

Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends the
evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the
valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from the foaming river-bed.
Birds were singing, and a wholesome peace lay on the land. To Frodo his
dangerous flight, and the rumours of the darkness growing in the world
outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces
that were turned to meet them as they entered were grave.

Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence about him.
Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gluin; and in a corner alone Strider was sitting,
clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by

"Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever come
hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent."

He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had not met before.
There was a younger dwarf at Gluin's side: his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel
there were several other counsellors of Elrond's household, of whom Erestor
was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf from the Grey Havens who had
come on an errand from Cnrdan the Shipwright. There was also a strange Elf
clad in green and brown, Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil,
the King of the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a
tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and grey-eyed, proud and
stern of glance.

He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and indeed
though his garments were rich, and his cloak was lined with fur, they were
stained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in which a single white
stone was set; his locks were shorn about his shoulders. On a baldric he
wore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon his knees. He
gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder.

Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be told.
Much was said of events in the world outside, especially in the South, and
in the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo had already
heard many rumours; but the tale of Gluin was new to him, and when the dwarf
spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour of their
works of hand the hearts of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were
troubled.

"You remember?’ said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in his
astonishment. "But I thought," he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, "I
thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago."

"Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!" cried Frodo in
amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected the Ring to be demanded
at once.

"Bring out the Ring, Frodo!" said Gandalf solemnly. "The time has come.
Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle."

There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken by
a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to reveal the Ring,

Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed
on his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out:

"I made that up myself," he whispered to Frodo, 'for the D®nadan, a
long time ago when he first told me about himself. I almost wish that my
adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes."

"Well told, my friend," he said, 'but that is enough at this time. For
the moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo, your heir. Let
him now speak!"

Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his dealings with
the Ring from the day that it passed into his keeping. Every step of his
journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was questioned and considered,
and everything that he could recall concerning the Black Riders was
examined. At last he sat down again.

"Yes, it made quite a long tale," answered Frodo. "But the story still
does not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal, especially
about Gandalf."

"Some, Galdor," said Gandalf, 'would think the tidings of Gluin, and
the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the halfling's trove is a thing of
great worth to the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the Nazgyl
keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed." At this Gluin stirred, but did not
speak. "The Three we know of. What then is this one that he desires so much?

"However, I wrote a message to Frodo, and trusted to my friend the
innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at long last to
the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard, in the end of the
Misty Mountains, not far from the Gap of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you
that that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the
northmost foothills of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But
Isengard is a circle of sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with a wall,
and in the midst of that valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was
not made by Saruman, but by the Men of N®menor long ago; and it is very tall
and has many secrets; yet it looks not to be a work of craft. It cannot be
reached save by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is
only one gate.

"That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured, apart from the words
of Saruman which might be lies. Long ere I came to Isengard I had heard
tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for
my friends in the Shire; but still I had some hope. I hoped that Frodo had
set forth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached Rivendell
before the deadly pursuit began. And both my fear and my hope proved
ill-founded. For my hope was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was
founded on the cunning of Sauron. But fat men who sell ale have many calls
to answer; and the power of Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in
the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to think that the
hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter in the Shire far
away.’

"I saw you!" cried Frodo. "You were walking backwards and forwards. The
moon shone in your hair."

Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. "It was only a dream' said
Frodo, 'but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite forgotten it. It came
some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think."

’True indeed!’ said Gandalf. "And there is one among them that might
have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of the Nine cannot
vie with him; tireless, swift as the flowing wind. Shadowfax they called
him. By day his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade,
and he passes unseen. Light is his footfall! Never before had any man
mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and so speedily he bore me that
I reached the Shire when Frodo was on the Barrow-downs, though I set out
from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton.

"But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings of
the Riders, and though I gained on them day by day, they were ever before
me. They had divided their forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern
borders, not far from the Greenway. and some invaded the Shire from the
south. I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone; but I had words with old
Gamgee. Many words and few to the point. He had much to say about the
shortcomings of the new owners of Bag End.

' "Worst is a bad word," I said to him, "and I hope you do not live to
see it." But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton
less than a week before, and that a black horseman had come to the Hill the
same evening. Then I rode on in fear. I came to Buckland and found it in
uproar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I came
to the house at Crickhollow, and it was broken open and empty; but on the
threshold there lay a cloak that had been Frodo's. Then for a while hope
left me, and I did not wait to gather news, or I might have been comforted;
but I rode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it went
many ways, and I was at a loss. But it seemed to me that one or two had
ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought of words that might
be said to the innkeeper.

"What did you do to him?" cried Frodo in alarm. "He was really very
kind to us and did all that he could."

"At sunrise I escaped and fled towards the north. I could not hope to
do more. It was impossible to find you, Frodo, in the wilderness, and it
would have been folly to try with all the Nine at my heels. Sol had to
trust to Aragorn. But I hoped to draw some of them off, and yet reach
Rivendell ahead of you and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me,
but they turned back after a while and made for the Ford, it seems. That
helped a little, for there were only five, not nine, when your camp was
attacked.

"And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond and the others
forgive the length of it. But such a thing has not happened before, that
Gandalf broke tryst and did not come when he promised. An account to the
Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required, I think.

"This is grievous news concerning Saruman," he said; 'for we trusted
him and he is deep in all our counsels. It is perilous to study too deeply
the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill. But such falls and betrayals,
alas, have happened before. Of the tales that we have heard this day the
tale of Frodo was most strange to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo
here; and it seems to me that he is perhaps not so alone and singular as I
had thought him. The world has changed much since I last was on the
westward
roads.

Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house, looking out upon a
sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness in
his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He was fingering his
great horn and frowning. At length he spoke.

No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo glanced
at all the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the Council sat with
downcast eyes, as if in deep thought. A great dread fell on him, as if he
was awaiting the pronouncement of some doom that he had long foreseen and
vainly hoped might after all never be spoken. An overwhelming longing to
rest and remain at peace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell filled all his heart.

Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt his heart
pierced by the sudden keenness of the glance. "If I understand aright all
that I have heard," he said, "I think that this task is appointed for you,

Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no one will. This is the hour of
the Shire-folk, when they arise from their quiet fields to shake the towers
and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise could have foreseen it? Or,
if they are wise, why should they expect to know it, until the hour has
struck?

Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. "A nice pickle we have landed
ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his head.

Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room.
Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the
Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion.

"Rewards!" said Frodo. "I can't imagine a more severe punishment. You
are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this hopeless
journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was done, and I could
rest here, a long while, perhaps for good."

"You were wrong," said Gandalf. "You were inattentive. I had already
heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as
you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only one that was not
surprised."

"Well, anyway," said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor
Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I
was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the
reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?"

has gone with Elrond's sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for
many long leagues before any move is made. So cheer up, Frodo! You will
probably make quite along stay here."

"That can't be helped," said Bilbo. "It's your fault partly, Frodo my
lad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funny way of honouring it, I
can't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can't
go till the reports come back.

"You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that," said Gandalf. "The power of
their master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We hope that they
were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous; but
we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to help you; but I will
whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in
the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you."

So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the
window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat and bowed. "I
only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me,
I want to see Elrond. I must be off."

"How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to Bilbo when
Gandalf had gone.

"Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant," said Frodo.

"It will do well, if it ever comes to that," said Frodo.

So the days slipped away, as each morning dawned bright and fair, and
each evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was waning fast; slowly the
golden light faded to pale silver, and the lingering leaves fell from the
naked trees. A wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to the
east. The Hunter's Moon waxed round in the night sky, and put to flight all
the lesser stars. But low in the South one star shone red. Every night, as
the Moon waned again, it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it
from his window, deep in the heavens burning like a watchful eye that glared
above the trees on the brink of the valley.

Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely at Frodo. "The
time has come," he said. "If the Ring is to set out, it must go soon. But
those who go with it must not count on their errand being aided by war or
force. They must pass into the domain of the Enemy far from aid. Do you
still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?"

"I do," said Frodo. "I will go with Sam."

"Strider!" said Frodo.

’Yes," he said with a smile. "I ask leave once again to be your
companion, Frodo."

"I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, 'only I thought you were
going to Minas Tirith with Boromir."

"But that will leave no place for us!" cried Pippin in dismay. "We
don't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo."

"Neither does Frodo," said Gandalf, unexpectedly supporting Pippin.

Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of their road and
the perils they would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with
them; but he was content to lean on their guidance, and he spent as much
time as he could with Bilbo.

In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall
of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren
and L®thien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry
and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo in
his own small room. Then Bilbo would read passages from his book (which
still seemed very incomplete), or scraps of his verses, or would take notes
of Frodo's adventures.

On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo, and the old
hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted the lid and
fumbled inside.

Frodo accepted it gratefully.

"I should look — well, I don't think I should look right in it," said
Frodo.

"Very well, I will take it," said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, and
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the top his
old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and jacket.

"I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all our past
kindnesses," said Frodo.

Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, for
dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed axe.
Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white knife. The
younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from the barrow; but
Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden.
Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was the elven-sword Glamdring,
the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely
Mountain.

Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire, and they
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A
gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in
many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the doorstep beside
Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey shapes in the
darkness.

Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in his
mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had forgotten
anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little box of salt
that he always carried and refilled when he could; a good supply of
pipe- weed (but not near enough, I'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen
hose: linen; various small belongings of his master's that Frodo had
forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in triumph when they were
called for. He went through them all.

"Good . . . good luck!" cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. "I don't
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall expect a
full account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!"

Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this land
even in the dark. The others were in file behind, and Legolas whose eyes
were keen was the rearguard. The first part of their journey was hard and
dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the wind. For many sunless
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed
able to keep out its searching fingers. Though the Company was well clad,
they seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during

Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty mountains
that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company was taking. At the
left of this high range rose three peaks; the tallest and nearest stood up
like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still
largely in the shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed
red.

Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. "We have
done well,’ he said. "We have reached the borders of the country that Men
call Hollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when Eregion was its
name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many
long miles further our feet have walked. The land and the weather will be
milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.’

"Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.

"Yes I did, sometimes," said Pippin, 'but I don't remember them. Frodo
has a better head for that sort of thing."

"Too warm, I shouldn't wonder," muttered Sam to Frodo. "But I'm
beginning to think it's time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain and saw
the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn,
or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke his piece. A fair
jaw-cracker dwarf-language must be!" Maps conveyed nothing to Sam's mind,
and all distances in these strange lands seemed so vast that he was quite
out of his reckoning.

Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo like the
remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and well planned, from
Hollin to the mountain-pass. The Moon, now at the full, rose over the
mountains, and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were black.
Many of them looked to have been worked by hands, though now they lay
tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land.

It was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon
was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt a shadow pass
over the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and then flashed out
again. He shivered.

Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and Aragorn
were continuing some debate that had begun long before. He listened
anxiously.

Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its
sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in grey cloud. Frodo
watched them, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned
to

the Company Gandalf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face
the weather and the high pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was
the other dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned.

Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment at the
top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm and saw the dim
white flakes of snow settling on his sleeve.

They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, filling all
the air, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and
Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.

While they were halted, the wind died down, and the snow slackened
until it almost ceased. They tramped on again. But they had not gone more
than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh fury. The wind whistled
and the snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir found it hard to
keep going. The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind the taller
folk, but it was plain that they could not go much further, if the snow
continued. Frodo's feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even
Gimli, as stout as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged.

"But what can we do?" cried Pippin miserably. He was leaning on Merry
and Frodo, and he was shivering.

A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into a
warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes, and out of the
shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice speaking. /
don 't think much of your diary , he said. Snowstorms on January the twelfth:
there was no need to come back to report that!

But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo , Frodo answered with an effort, when
he felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir
had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.

As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liquor
he felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left his limbs.

Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes still falling out of the dark to be
revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying fire; but for a long
time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly, as sleep was
beginning to creep over him again, he was aware that the wind had indeed
fallen, and the flakes were becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly a dim
light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether.

With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if for the
first time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no boots, but wore
only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made little imprint in the
snow.

After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow but
now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli perched among
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane;
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled
down a fall of stones and slithering snow. The spray of it half blinded the
Company as they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again
they saw that the path was blocked behind them.

Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his head
was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march downhill. Black specks
swam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the
distance below him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dots were
circling in the air.

"And then where are we to go? ’ asked Frodo.

no sign. Frodo looked troubled.

"You are right, Frodo," said Gandalf: 'to go back is to admit defeat
and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring must remain
there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell
will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time it will be destroyed.

"Then we must go on, if there is a way," said Frodo with a sigh. Sam
sank back into gloom.

The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. "I
do not wish to go," he said; 'but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of
Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slept on it.
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold
gloom. How the wind howls ! '

The night was old, and westward the waning moon was setting, gleaming
fitfully through the breaking clouds. Suddenly Frodo started from sleep.
Without warning a storm of howls broke out fierce and wild all about the
camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking them
from every side at once.

In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many grey
shapes spring over the ring of stones. More and more followed. Through the
throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with a
great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood
with

They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftly
up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached the top they saw
that they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up of
the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind them the sinking Sun filled the cool
western sky with glimmering gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake.
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had
been dammed and had filled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were
reared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: final and
impassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a fissure or crack could Frodo
see in the frowning stone.

"Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. "I had not thought of that. And poor Sam!

When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake they found a
narrow creek that barred their way. It was green and stagnant, thrust out
like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills. Gimli strode forward
undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at
the edge. Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, for
under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy stones, and footing was
treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust at the touch of the dark unclean
water on his feet.

Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed as
quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry land between the lake
and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a dozen yards across, and
encumbered with fallen rock and stones; but they found a way, hugging the
cliff, and keeping as far from the dark water as they might. A mile
southwards along the shore they came upon holly trees. Stumps and dead
boughs were rotting in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets,
or of a hedge that had once lined the road across the drowned valley. But
close under the cliff there stood, still strong and living, . two tall
trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined.

"He'd follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon's den, if I led him," protested
Sam. "It'd be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these
wolves about."

’What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying to decipher
the inscription on the arch. ’I thought I knew the elf-letters but I cannot
read these.’

’Why did you do that, Boromir? ' said Frodo. V I hate this place, too,
and I am afraid. I don't know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind the
doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool. Don't disturb it! '

He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. But at that
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by the ankle,
and he fell with a cry. Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped after
him, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran back again, weeping and cursing.
The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host
of snakes were swimming up from the southern end.

Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it was
pale-green and luminous and wet. Its fingered end had hold of Frodo's foot
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it
with a knife.

The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help.
Twenty others arms came rippling out. The dark water boiled, and there was a
hideous stench.

They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up, and
Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed across
the narrow shore and fingered the cliff- wall and the doors. One came
wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned
and paused. If he was considering what word would close the gate again from
within, there was no need. Many coiling arms seized the doors on either
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo
they slammed, and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came
dully through the ponderous stone.

Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black
darkness. "Poor old Bill! ’ he said in a choking voice. "Poor old Bill!
Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to choose,
Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’

"I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my foot
first touched the water," said Frodo. "What was the thing, or were there
many of them? '

"I do not know," answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by one
purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark waters under
the mountains. There are older and fouler things than Ores in the deep
places of the world." He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever it
was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on Frodo first among all the
Company.

"Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing,
since we can't find a dining-room! ' said Frodo. He had begun to shake off
the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt extremely hungry.

"How long is that going to take us? ' asked Frodo.

After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager
to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and were willing, tired as
they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf walked in
front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light
of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his
sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in the dim light
as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting
or of Glamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish
smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Ores
were near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and the
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked
Aragorn.

The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend. It
went steadily down for a long while before it became level once again. The
air grew hot and stifling, but it was not foul, and at times they felt
currents of cooler air upon their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings
in the walls. There were many of these. In the pale ray of the wizard's
staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches and of other passages and
tunnels, sloping up, or running steeply down, or opening blankly dark on
either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering.

As these dangers became more frequent their march became slower.
Already they seemed to have been tramping on, on, endlessly to the
mountains' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort
in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo's spirits had risen for a while
after his escape, and after food and a draught of the cordial; but now a
deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept over him again. Though he had been
healed in Rivendell of the knife-stroke, that grim wound had not been
without effect. His senses were sharper and more aware of things that could
not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could
see more in the dark than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And
he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain against
his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of
evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He gripped tighter on
the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.

The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried whispers.
There was no sound but the sound of their own feet; the dull stump of
Gimli's dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the light step of Legolas;
the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear the slow firm
footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they halted for a moment
they heard nothing at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and
drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear, or to imagine that he heard,
something else: like the faint fall of soft bare feet. It was never loud

In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct line
east, though they must have actually walked twenty miles or more. As the
road climbed upwards' Frodo's spirits rose a little; but he still felt
oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the
Company and beyond the fall and patter of their feet, a following footstep
that was not an echo.

Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking
about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt
no doubt that Bilbo knew quite well. It was indeed a kingly gift. But now
his thoughts had been carried away from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to
Bilbo, and to Bag End in the days while Bilbo was still there. He wished
with all his heart that he was back there, and in those days, mowing the
lawn, or pottering among the flowers, and that he had never heard of Moria,
or mithril — or the Ring.

A deep silence fell. One by one the others fell asleep. Frodo was on
guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors out of deep
places, dread came over him. His hands were cold and his brow damp. He
listened. All his mind was given to listening and nothing else for two slow
hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall.

Frodo sat up. "Good morning! 'said Gandalf: "For morning it is again
at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side of Moria.
Before today is over we ought to find the Great Gates and see the waters of
Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us."

"It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a
curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven:

"He is dead then," said Frodo. T feared it was so." Gimli cast his
hood over his face.

The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin. Frodo
thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and of Balin's
visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the mountains it
seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world.

There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them were
large iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and plundered; but
beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been
slashed and stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained with black and
other dark marks like old blood that little of it could be read. Gandalf
lifted it carefully, but the leaves crackled and broke as he laid it on the
slab. He pored over it for some time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli
standing at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they
were written by many different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale,
and here and there in Elvish script.

Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath blaze up in
his heart. "The Shire! ' he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped,
and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot
jerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo's arm. Black drops dripped
from the blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir hurled himself against the
door and slammed it again.

"One for the Shire! ' cried Aragorn. "The hobbit's bite is deep! You
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo ! '

But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had reached the
stair outside, a huge ore-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black mail
from head to foot, leaped into the chamber; behind him his followers
clustered in the doorway. His broad flat face was swart, his eyes were like
coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a great spear. With a thrust of
his huge hide shield he turned Boromir's sword and bore him backwards,
throwing him to the ground. Diving under Aragorn's blow with the speed of a
striking snake he charged into the Company and thrust with his spear
straight at Frodo. The blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo was

Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for the
stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him. The others followed; but
Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas: in spite of the peril he lingered
by Balin's tomb with his head bowed. Boromir hauled the eastern door to,
grinding upon its hinges: it had great iron rings on either side, but could
not be fastened.

"I am all right," gasped Frodo. "I can walk. Put me down! '

The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their
way down a long flight of steps, and then looked back; but they could see
nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer of the wizard's staff. He
seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed door. Frodo breathed
heavily and leaned against Sam, who put his arms about him. They stood
peering up the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear the
voice of Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with
a sighing echo. He could not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be
trembling. Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom,
doom.

"I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something else is buried
there too. I cannot say. But at least the passage behind us was completely
blocked. Ah! I have never felt so spent, but it is passing. And now what
about you, Frodo? There was not time to say so, but I have never been more
delighted in my life than when you spoke. I feared that it was a brave but
dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.’

"What about me? ' said Frodo. "I am alive, and whole I think. I am
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.’

’Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo; 'though I
feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.’ He said no
more. He found breathing painful.

’You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. "There is more about you than
meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if the remark
meant more than it said.

He turned left and sped across the smooth floor of the hall. The
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the beat and
echo of many hurrying feet behind. A shrill yell went up: they had been
seen. There was a ring and clash of steel. An arrow whistled over Frodo's
head.

Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall the
floor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door could only be
reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the
chasm with one curving spring of fifty feet. It was an ancient defence of
the Dwarves against any enemy that might capture the First Hall and the
outer passages. They could only pass across it in single file. At the brink
Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind.

Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang back. Another
pierced Gandalf s hat and stuck there like a black feather. Frodo looked
behind. Beyond the fire he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to be
hundreds of ores. They brandished spears and scimitars which shone red as
blood in the firelight. Doom, doom rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and
louder, doom, doom.

They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door. Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage. Along
this they fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that
he himself was weeping as he ran. Doom, doom, doom the drum-beats rolled
behind, mournful now and slow; doom!

"Come with me, Frodo! ' cried the dwarf, springing from the road. "I
would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zvram." He ran down the long
green slope. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue water in spite
of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind.

For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the others; but
Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, and after a while they lagged
behind. They had eaten nothing since the early morning. Sam's cut was
burning like fire, and his head felt light. In spite of the shining sun the
wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt
every step more painful and he gasped for breath.

"I am sorry, Frodo! ' he cried, full of concern. "So much has happened
this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were
hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease
you,

While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of brush- and
fir-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was
not

He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. "They are dry
and some of their virtue has one, he said, but here I have still some of the
leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weathertop. Crush one in the water,
and wash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn. Frodo! '

"I am all right," said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched.

Gently he stripped off Frodo's old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of
wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before his eyes like
the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it off and held it up, and
the gems on it glittered like stars, and the sound of the shaken rings was
like the tinkle of rain in a pool.

There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast.
Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings
had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scored
and bruised where he had been hurled against the wall. While the others set
the food ready. Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas was
steeped. The pungent fragrance filled the dell, and all those who stooped
over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the
pain leave him, and his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore to
the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.

When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They put out the
fire and hid all traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they took to
the road again. They had not gone far before the sun sank behind the
westward heights and great shadows crept down the mountain-sides. Dusk
veiled their feet, and mist rose in the hollows. Away in the east the
evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and
Frodo now feeling eased and greatly refreshed were able to go at a fair
pace, and with only one brief halt Aragorn led the Company on for nearly
three more hours.

It was dark. Deep night had fallen. There were many clear stars, hut
the fast- waning moon would not be seen till late. Gimli and Frodo were at
the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for any sound upon the
road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence.

Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade was dull. Yet
he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the shadows had fallen

"I don't know." answered Frodo. "I thought I heard feet, and I thought
I saw a light-like eyes. I have thought so often, since we first entered
Moria."

One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For a moment Frodo
stood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold
but its touch was clean, and as he went on and it mounted to his knees, he
felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.

At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the waterfall
running sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he could hear a
voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water.

There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and then another
clear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what
was said, for the speech that the Silvan folk east of the mountains used
among themselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and
answered

"Yes, they are Elves," said Legolas; 'and they say that you breathe so
loud that they could shoot you in the dark." Sam hastily put his hand over
his mouth. "But they say also that you need have no fear. They have been
aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and
knew that I was one of their Northern kindred, and therefore they did not
hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me
climb up with Frodo; for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of
our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep watch at the
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done."

Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of rope,
silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender it
proved strong enough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly up, and Frodo
followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches
of the mallorn-tree grew out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept
upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown of many boughs,

When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas seated with
three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-grey, and could not be seen
among the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of
them uncovered a small lamp that gave out a slender silver beam. He held it
up, looking at Frodo's face, and Sam's. Then he shut off the light again,
and spoke words of welcome in his elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in
return.

"But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dbin's trusty people, and
friendly to Elrond," said Frodo. "Elrond himself chose him to be one of our
companions, and he has been brave and faithful."

Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars glinting
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his side long
before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see the grey forms of two
elves sitting motionless with their arms about their knees, speaking in
whispers. The other had gone down to take up his watch on one of the lower
branches. At last lulled by the wind in the boughs above, and the sweet
murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below, Frodo fell asleep with the song of
Legolas running in his mind.

A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. Frodo sat up in
alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards the hobbits.

"What is it? ' said Frodo.

"Ores! ' said Frodo. "What are they doing? ' But the Elf had gone.

There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, and the very
falls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shivered in his wraps. He was
thankful that they had not been caught on the ground; but he felt that the
trees offered little protection, except concealment. Ores were as keen as
hounds on a scent, it was said, but they could also climb. He drew out
Sting: it flashed and glittered like a blue flame and then slowly faded
again and grew dull. In spite of the fading of his sword the feeling of
immediate danger did not leave Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and
crawled to the opening and peered down. He was almost certain that he could
hear stealthy movements at the tree’s foot far below.

Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came like a soft
hissing through closed teeth. Then coming up, close to the stem, Frodo saw

Day came pale from the East. As the light grew it filtered through the
yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to the hobbits that the early
sun of a cool summer's morning was shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the
moving branches. Looking through an opening on the south side of the flet
Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying like a sea of fallow gold
tossing gently in the breeze.

The morning was still young and cold when the Company set out again,
guided now by Haldir and his brother R®mil. "Farewell, sweet Nimrodel! '
cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and caught a gleam of white foam among
the

As they spoke thus, the Company filed slowly along the paths in the
wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground
beneath their feet smooth and soft, and after a while they walked more
freely, without fear of hurt or fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo found
his hearing and other senses sharpened. He could smell the trees and the
trodden grass. He could hear many different notes in the rustle of the
leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on his right, and the thin clear
voices of birds in the sky. He felt the sun upon his face and hands when
they passed through an open glade.

rested and slept without fear upon the ground; for their guides would not
permit them to unbind their eyes, and they could not climb. In the morning
they went on again, walking without haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo
was aware that they had passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard
the sound of many voices all around him.

When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up and caught his
breath. They were standing in an open space. To the left stood a great
mound, covered with a sward of grass as green as Spring-time in the Elder
Days. Upon it, as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the outer had
bark of snowy white, and were leafless but beautiful in their shapely
nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees of great height, still arrayed in
pale gold. High amid the branches of a towering tree that stood in the
centre of all there gleamed a white flet. At the feet of the trees, and all
about the green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden flowers
shaped like stars. Among them, nodding on slender stalks, were other
flowers, white and palest green: they glimmered as a mist amid the rich hue
of the grass. Over all the sky was blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed
upon the hill and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.

The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass, but Frodo
stood awhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to him that he had stepped
through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A light was upon it
for which his language had no name. All that he saw was shapely, but the
shapes seemed at once clear cut, as if they had been first conceived and
drawn at the uncovering of his eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for
ever. He saw no colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and green,
but they were fresh and poignant, as if he had at that moment first

They followed him as he stepped lightly up the grass-clad slopes.
Though he walked and breathed, and about him living leaves and flowers were
stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that he was in
a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When
he had gone and passed again into the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer
from the Shire would walk there, upon the grass among elanor and niphredil
in fair Lothlurien.

They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the South Wind
blew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the branches. Frodo stood still,
hearing far off_ great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away,
and sea-birds crying whose race had perished from the earth.

Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high flet. As Frodo
prepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon the tree beside the ladder:
never before had he been so suddenly and so keenly aware of the feel and
texture of a tree's skin and of the life within it. He felt a delight in
wood and the touch of it, neither as forester nor as carpenter; it was the
delight of the living tree itself.

Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many mighty
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it,
it seemed to him that the power and light came that held all the land in

At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as a
tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in
his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as Frodo looked at him he
knew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For the
grim years were removed from the face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed in
white, a young lord tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue
to one whom Frodo could not see. Arwen vanimelda, nambril! he said, and then
he drew a breath, and returning out of his thought he looked at Frodo and
smiled.

"Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth," he said, 'and here my heart
dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that we still
must tread, you and I. Come with me! ' And taking Frodo's hand in his, he
left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man.

They went along many paths and climbed many stairs, until they came to
the high places and saw before them amid a wide lawn a fountain shimmering.
It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees, and it fell
into a basin of silver, from which a white stream spilled. Upon the south
side of the lawn there stood the mightiest of all the trees; its great
smooth bole gleamed like grey silk, and up it towered, until its first
branches, far above, opened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves.
Beside it a broad white ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were
seated. They sprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they
were tall and clad in grey mail, and from their shoulders hung long white
cloaks.

"Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may follow as they
wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs,
but you may rest upon the way."

As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, some
on another, and some set about the bole of the tree, so that the ladder
passed through them. At a great height above the ground he came to a wide
talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that
almost it would have served for a hall of Men upon the earth. He entered
behind Haldir, and found that he was in a chamber of oval shape, in the
midst of which grew the trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its
crown, and yet making still a pillar of wide girth.

Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him in his own
tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon his face.

"Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire! ' said Celeborn. "When
all have come we will speak together."

"Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended," said Frodo.
’Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our escape
seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.’

"Your quest is known to us," said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. "But we
will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe,
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed.
For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of
Middle-earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the power of kings. He has dwelt
in the West since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt with him years
uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the
mountains, and together through ages of the world we have fought the long
defeat.

And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him with
questions. "She held you long in her gaze, Ring -bearer,’ he said.

"Yes," said Frodo; 'but whatever came into my mind then I will keep
there."

It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into halting words.

"No, I am afraid not," said Frodo. "But that is the best I can do yet."

"Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you'll say a word
about his fireworks," said Sam. "Something like this:

One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool twilight.
Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the shadow of parting
had fallen: he knew somehow that the time was very near when he must leave
Lothlurien.

"You can see and feel it everywhere," said Frodo.

"Well," said Sam, 'you can't see nobody working it. No fireworks like
poor Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don't see nothing of the Lord and
Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things,
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '

"I wouldn"t," said Frodo. "I am content. And I don't miss Gandalf's
fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice."

"I am afraid that's only too true, Sam," said Frodo. "Yet I hope very
much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again."

The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf-lady beside
him was tall and pale. "What shall we look for, and what shall we see? '
asked Frodo, filled with awe.

Frodo did not answer.

"And I'd not mind a glimpse of what's going on at home," he said in an
aside to Frodo. "It seems a terrible long time that I've been away. But
there, like as not I'll only see the stars, or something that I won't
understand."

"There's only stars, as I thought," he said. Then he gave a low gasp,
for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had been withdrawn, the Mirror
grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches of trees
were waving and tossing in the wind. But before Sam could make up his mind
what it was that he saw, the light faded; and now he thought he saw Frodo
with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed
to see himself going along a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding
stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently for something,
but what it was he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went
back, and he saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and
he could see what was going on: they were not waving in the wind, they were
falling, crashing to the ground.

"No, I’ll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said.

"Do you now wish to look, Frodo? ’ said the Lady Galadriel. "You did
not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’

"Do you advise me to look? ’ asked Frodo.

’No,’ she said. "I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am not a
counsellor. You may learn something, and whether what you see be fair or
evil, that may be profitable, and yet it may not. Seeing is both good and
perilous. Yet I think, Frodo, that you have courage and wisdom enough for
the venture, or I would not have brought you here. Do as you will! ’

"I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent over
the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit land.
Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A long grey road
wound back out of sight. Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint
and small at first, but growing larger and clearer as it approached.
Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded him of Gandalf. He almost called
aloud the wizard’s name, and then he saw that the figure was clothed not in
grey but in white, in a white that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its
hand there was a white staff. The head was so bowed that he could see no
face, and presently the figure turned aside round a bend in the road and
went out of the Mirror's view. Doubt came into Frodo's mind: was this a
vision of Gandalf on one of his many lonely journeys long ago, or was it
Saruman?

Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes followed that
Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had become
involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen before
but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose and raged in a great
storm. Then he saw against the Sun, sinking blood-red into a wrack of
clouds, the black outline of a tall ship with torn sails riding up out of
the West. Then a wide river flowing through a populous city. Then a white
fortress with seven towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now
it was morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing
the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke as of fire and battle
arose, and again the sun went down in a burning red that faded into a grey
mist; and into the mist a small ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It
vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away.

But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole had
opened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the black
abyss there appeared a single Eye that slowly grew, until it filled nearly
all the Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to cry
out or to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but was itself
glazed, yellow as a cat's, watchful and intent, and the black slit of its
pupil opened on a pit, a window into nothing.

Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew
with certainty and horror that among the many things that it sought he
himself was one. But he also knew that it could not see him-not yet, not
unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon its chain about his neck grew
heavy, heavier than a great stone, and his head was dragged downwards. The
Mirror seemed to be growing hot and curls of steam were rising from the
water. He was slipping forward.

"Do not touch the water!" said the Lady Galadriel softly. The vision
faded, and Frodo found that he was looking at the cool stars twinkling in
the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady.

V I know what it was that you last saw," she said; 'for that is also in
my mind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that only by singing amid the
trees, nor even by the slender arrows of elven-bows, is this land of
Lothlurien maintained and defended against its Enemy. I say to you, Frodo,
that even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or
all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my

She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards the East
in a gesture of rejection and denial. Edrendil, the Evening Star, most
beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it that the figure of
the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring
about her finger; it glittered like polished gold overlaid with silver
light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even-star had come down to
rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed
to him that he understood.

Frodo bent his head. "And what do you wish? ' he said at last.

"You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel," said Frodo. "I
will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter for
me.’

She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore there issued a
great light that illuminated her alone and left all else dark. She stood
before Frodo seeming now tall beyond measurement, and beautiful beyond
enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light
faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was shrunken: a slender
elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad.

"I would ask one thing before we go," said Frodo, 'a thing which I
often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear the One
Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts of those that
wear them? ’

They would have been willing to follow a leader over the River and into the
shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in
his mind.

the heir of Elendil should come forth and strive with Sauron for the
mastery. But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laid on him; and he
knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in the end to
go with Boromir. And yet what help could he or any of the Company give to
Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?

"I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty," said
Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while, sitting with his eyes
fixed on Frodo, as if he was trying to read the Halfling’s thoughts. At
length he spoke again, softly, as if he was debating with himself. "If you
wish only to destroy the Ring,’ he said, "then there is little use in war
and weapons; and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot help. But if you wish to
destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then it is folly to go without
force into his domain; and folly to throw away." He paused suddenly, as if
he had become aware that he was speaking his thoughts aloud. "It would be
folly to throw lives away, I mean," he ended. "It is a choice between
defending a strong place and walking openly into the arms of death. At
least, that is how I see it."

Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir's glance, and he
looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final
words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said
something like this at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction
of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought
and made no sign that he had heeded Boromir's words. And so their debate
ended. Merry and Pippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The
night

After their morning meal the Company said farewell to the lawn by the
fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a fair place, and it had
become like home to them, though they could not count the days and nights
that they had passed there. As they stood for a moment looking at the white
water in the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the green grass
of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight.

The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in
one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the third were
Legolas and Gimli, who had now become fast friends. In this last boat most
of the goods and packs were stowed. The boats were moved and steered with
short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all was ready
Aragorn led them on a trial up the Silverlode. The current was swift and
they went forward slowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and
looking back wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on the water
dazzled his eyes. As they passed beyond the green field of the Tongue, the
trees drew down to the river's brink. Here and there golden leaves tossed
and floated on the rippling stream. The air was very bright and still, and
there was a silence, except for the high distant song of larks.

The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their boats and
followed it. There in the last end of Egladil upon the green grass the
parting feast was held; but Frodo ate and drank little, heeding only the
beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible,
nor filled with hidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by men of later
days Elves still at times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision

"And you, Ring-bearer,’ she said, turning to Frodo. "I come to you last
who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared this.’ She held up
a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and rays of white light
sprang from her hand. ’In this phial,’ she said, 'is caught the light of
Edrendil’s star, set amid the waters of my fountain. It will shine still
brighter when night is about you. May it be a light to you in dark places,
when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her Mirror! ’

Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them, he saw
her again standing like a queen, great and beautiful, but no longer
terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say.

Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the currents of the
Great River, and their boats turned and began to speed southwards. Soon the
white form of the Lady was small and distant. She shone like a window of
glass upon a far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from a
mountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then it seemed to Frodo
that she lifted her arms in a final farewell, and far but piercing-clear on
the following wind came the sound of her voice singing. But now she sang in
the ancient tongue of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not understand
the words: fair was the music, but it did not comfort him.

Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks rose upon either
side, and the light of Furien was hidden. To that fair land Frodo never came
again.

So the Company went on their long way, down the wide hurrying waters,
borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank, and they could
not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze died away and the River
flowed without a sound. No voice of bird broke the silence. The sun grew
misty as the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale sky like a high white
pearl. Then it faded into the West, and dusk came early, followed by a grey
and starless night. Far into the dark quiet hours they floated on, guiding
their boats under the overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great trees
passed by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty roots through the
mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and listened to
the faint lap and gurgle of the River fretting among the tree-roots and
driftwood near the shore, until his head nodded and he fell into an uneasy
sleep.

Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well wrapped,
under tall grey -skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west
bank of the Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night away, and the grey
of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire
near at hand.

Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but it was
flat, and in many places green with wide plains of grass. On this side of
the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all
view to the west, as the little boats went rustling by along their
fluttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in the light
cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through openings Frodo
could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads, and far beyond them hills in

"How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! ’ said Frodo.

from the East. On the other side the meads had become rolling downs of
withered grass amidst a land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of
the lawns and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlurien. There
was little speech and no laughter in any of the boats. Each member of the
Company was busy with his own thoughts.

The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summer night in
some northern glade amid the beech- woods; Gimli was fingering gold in his
mind, and wondering if it were fit to be wrought into the housing of the
Lady's gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for
Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some
restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving
the boat close behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking
back, caught a queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo.
Sam had long ago made up his mind that, though boats were maybe not as
dangerous as he had been brought up to believe, they were far more
uncomfortable than even he had imagined. Fie was cramped and miserable,
having nothing to do but stare at the winter -lands crawling by and the grey
water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use they did not
trust Sam with one.

As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowed
heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and
longed

That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western bank. Sam
lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo. V I had a funny dream an hour or two
before we stopped, Mr. Frodo," he said. "Or maybe it wasn't a dream. Funny
it was anyway."

"Well, what was it? ' said Frodo, knowing that Sam would not settle
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. "I haven't seen or thought
of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlurien."

"It wasn't funny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was queer. All wrong, if it
wasn't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with
eyes! '

"The log's all right," said Frodo. "There are many in the River. But
leave out the eyes ! ’

"I said to myself: "dreaming again, Sam Gamgee," I said: and I said no
more just then. But I've been thinking since, and now I'm not so sure. What
do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? '

"I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleep in your
eyes Sam, said Frodo, if this was the first time that those eyes had been
seen. But it isn't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lurien. And
I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night. Haldir
saw it too. And do you remember the report of the Elves that went after the
ore-band? '

"Yes, that is what I have feared for some time," said Frodo. "Ever
since the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and picked
up our trail then; but I hoped that our stay in Lurien would throw him off
the scent again. The miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods
by the Silverlode, watching us start off! ’

V I might," said Frodo, 'and I might say "luggage with eyes". You shall
watch; but only if you promise to wake me halfway towards morning, if
nothing happens before then."

In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to find Sam
shaking him. "It's a shame to wake you," whispered Sam, 'but that's what you
said. There's nothing to tell, or not much. I thought I heard some soft
plashing and a sniffing noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such
queer sounds by a river at night."

He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets, and fought off
his sleep. Minutes or hours passed slowly, and nothing happened. Frodo was
just yielding to the temptation to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly
visible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could
be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes
shone coldly as they peered inside, and then they lifted and gazed up at
Frodo on the eyot. They were not more than a yard or two away, and Frodo
heard the soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from its
sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut off. There was
another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot away downstream into
the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up'

"What is it? ' he whispered, springing up and coming to Frodo. "I felt
something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? '

"Gollum," answered Frodo. "Or at least, so I guess."

’I am out of my reckoning,’ he said to Frodo. ’I did not know that we
had come so far: Anduin flows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir must be
close at hand already.’

’All together, paddle! ’ shouted Boromir. ’Paddle! Or we shall be
driven on the shoals.’ Even as he spoke Frodo felt the keel beneath him
grate upon stone.

At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistled
over them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo between the
shoulders

"Gollum's doing, I'll be bound." said Sam to Frodo. "And a nice place
to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! '

Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above him, as he gazed into
the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned with sharp
white stars that glittered in the black pools of the sky behind. But now
rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds advanced, sending out
dark outriders into the starry fields. A sudden dread fell on the Company.

swiftly, came out of the blackness in the South, and sped towards the
Company, blotting out all light as it approached. Soon it appeared as a
great winged creature, blacker than the pits in the night. Fierce voices
rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill running
through him and clutching at his heart; there was a deadly cold, like the
memory of an old wound, in his shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide.

Suddenly the great bow of Lurien sang. Shrill went the arrow from the
elven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above him the winged shape swerved.
There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down
into the gloom of the eastern shore. The sky was clean again. There was a
tumult of many voices far away, cursing and wailing in the darkness, and
then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night.

"It was not a Balrog," said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that
had come upon him. "It was something colder. I think it was — ' Then he
paused and fell silent.

"What do you think? ' asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from his boat, as
if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo's face.

"I think — No, I will not say," answered Frodo. "Whatever it was, its
fall has dismayed our enemies."

fingers, and looking up at the sky. "It's very strange," he murmured. "The
Moon's the same in the Shire and in Wilderland, or it ought to be. But
either it's out of its running, or I'm all wrong in my reckoning. You'll
remember, Mr. Frodo, the Moon was waning as we lay on the flet up in that
tree: a week from the full, I reckon. And we'd been a week on the way last
night, when up pops a New Moon as thin as a nail-paring, as if we had never
stayed no time in the Elvish country.

"And perhaps that was the way of it,’ said Frodo. "In that land, maybe,
we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was not, I think,
until Silverlode bore us back to Anduin that we returned to the time that
flows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don't remember any moon,
either new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun by day."

"But the wearing is slow in Lurien," said Frodo. "The power of the Lady
is on it. Rich are the hours, though short they seem, in Caras Galadhon,
where Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.’

Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it became plain
that Frodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave in. "It is not
the way of the Men of Minas Tirith to desert their friends at need," he
said, 'and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock.

It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb the
steep bank and vanish into the mists; but his fears proved groundless. Only
two or three hours had passed, and it was barely mid-day, when the shadowy
shapes of the explorers appeared again.

Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks approaching:
like great pinnacles or pillars of stone they seemed. Tall and sheer and
ominous they stood upon either side of the stream. A narrow gap appeared
between them, and the River swept the boats towards it.

As Frodo was borne towards them the great pillars rose like towers to
meet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast grey figures silent but
threatening. Then he saw that they were indeed shaped and fashioned: the
craft and power of old had wrought upon them, and still they preserved
through the suns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which
they had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded in the deep waters stood
two great kings of stone: still with blurred eyes and crannied brows they
frowned upon the North. The left hand of each was raised palm outwards in
gesture of warning; in each right hand there was an axe; upon each head
there was a crumbling helm and crown. Great power and majesty they still

wore, the silent wardens of a long -vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon
Frodo, and he cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as
the boat drew near. Even Boromir bowed his head as the boats whirled by.
frail and fleeting as little leaves, under the enduring shadow of the
sentinels of N®menor. So they passed into the dark chasm of the Gates.

Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side. Far
off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed
over them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front muttering and
groaning: "What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of this
boat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! '

"Fear not!" said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned and saw
Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no longer
there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding
the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was
blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to
his own land.

The chasm was long and dark, and filled with the noise of wind and
rushing water and echoing stone. It bent somewhat towards the west so that
at first all was dark ahead; but soon Frodo saw a tall gap of light before
him, ever growing. Swiftly it drew near, and suddenly the boats shot
through, out into a wide clear light.

If Gollum had contrived to follow them, he remained unseen and unheard.
Nonetheless as the night wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in his
sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn
it was to watch.

"Why are you waking? ' asked Frodo. "It is not your watch."

"Why? ’ said Frodo. "Are enemies at hand? ’

Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edges
gleamed dimly in the night. "Ores! ’ he said. "Not very near, and yet too
near, it seems.’

The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars
of cloud like the fumes of a great burning. The rising sun lit them from
beneath with flames of murky red; but soon it climbed above them into a
clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with gold. Frodo looked out

"Well, Frodo," said Aragorn at last. "I fear that the burden is laid
upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own way you
alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and
though I have tried to bear his part, I do not know what design or hope he
had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems that if he
were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate."

Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. "I know that haste
is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer,
and I will speak. Let me be alone! ’

Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. "Very well, Frodo son of
Drogo," he said. "You shall have an hour, and you shall be alone. We will
stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.’

Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had been watching
his master with great concern, shook his head and muttered: "Plain as a
pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now."

Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while the
others restrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes of Boromir
followed Frodo intently, until he passed out of sight in the trees at the
foot of Amon Hen.

Wandering aimlessly at first in the wood, Frodo found that his feet

were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill. He came to a path, the
dwindling ruins of a road of long ago. In steep places stairs of stone had
been hewn, but now they were cracked and worn, and split by the roots of
trees. For some while he climbed, not caring which way he went, until he
came to a grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and in the midst was a
wide flat stone. The little upland lawn was open upon the East and was
filled now with the early sunlight. Frodo halted and looked out over the
River, far below him, to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great
gulf of air between him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros was a
mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom.

"I was afraid for you, Frodo," he said, coming forward. "If Aragorn is
right and Ores are near, then none of us should wander alone, and you least
of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too is heavy. May I stay now
and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would comfort me. Where
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together
may perhaps find wisdom."

"You are kind," answered Frodo. "But I do not think that any speech
will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid of doing it,
Boromir: afraid."

Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in
the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.

’I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir," said
Frodo. "And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart."

"No hope while the Ring lasts," said Frodo.

Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught the strange
gleam in Boromir's eyes, yet his face was still kind and friendly. "It is
best that it should lie hidden," he answered.

"Were you not at the Council? ' answered Frodo. "Because we cannot use
it, and what is done with it turns to evil.’

Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemed
to have forgotten Frodo, while his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the
mustering of men; and he drew plans for great alliances and glorious
victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself a mighty king,
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms.

"Surely you see it, my friend?" he said, turning now suddenly to Frodo
again. "You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should pardon
you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?"

"No, I am afraid," said Frodo. "Simply afraid. But I am glad to have
heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now."

"You misunderstand me,’ said Frodo.

"But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. "My city
is not far now; and it is little further from there to Mordor than from
here. We have been long in the wilderness, and you need news of what the
Enemy is doing before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo," he said.
"You

need rest before your venture, if go you must.’ He laid his hand on the
hobbit's shoulder in friendly fashion; but Frodo felt the hand trembling
with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the
tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength.

"No! no! ' cried Frodo. "The Council laid it upon me to bear it."

Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great flat stone stood
between them. "Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. "Why
not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt and fear? You can lay the
blame on me, if you will. You can say that I was too strong and took it by
force. For I am too strong for you, halfling," he cried; and suddenly he
sprang over the stone and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face was
hideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes.

Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There was only
one thing he could do: trembling he pulled out the Ring upon its chain and
quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him again. The
Man gasped, stared for a moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking
here and there among the rocks and trees.

"What have I said? ' he cried. "What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called.
"Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! '

There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was already
far away, leaping blindly up the path to the hill-top. Terror and grief
shook him, seeing in his thought the mad fierce face of Boromir, and his
burning eyes.

The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly balanced between
their piercing points, he writhed, tormented. Suddenly he was aware of
himself again. Frodo, neither the Voice nor the Eye: free to choose, and
with one remaining instant in which to do so. He took the Ring off his
finger. He was kneeling in clear sunlight before the high seat. A black
shadow seemed to pass like an arm above him; it missed Amon Hen and
groped

Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will was
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. T will do now what I
must," he said. This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at
work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does more
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can trust are too
dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen
into evil. I will go alone. At once."

The others remained long by the river -side. For some time they had been
silent, moving restlessly about; but now they were sitting in a circle, and
they were talking. Every now and again they made efforts to speak of other
things, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient history, and the remnants of
its great works that could still be seen in this strange border -land of the
Emyn Muil: the stone kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great
Stair beside the falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why
was

"We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but the Lord
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond said was beyond
his power: either to keep the Burden secret, or to hold off the full might
of the Enemy when he comes to take it. Which way would any of us choose in
Frodo’s place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’

’Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ’Yet we must needs make up our
minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call
him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.’

Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached the
last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose
Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.’

"That won’t do at all! ' cried Merry. "We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and
I always intended to go wherever he went, and we still do. But we did not
realize what that would mean. It seemed different so far away, in the Shire
or in Ri vendell. It would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor. Why
can't we stop him?"

"Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried. "He's been a bit
queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's not in this business. He's off to
his home, as he always said; and no blame to him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows
he's got to find the Cracks of Doom, if he can. But he's afraid. Now it's
come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of
course he's had a bit of schooling, so to speak-we all have-since we left
home, or he'd be so terrified he'd just fling the Ring in the River and
bolt. But he's still too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us
either: whether we'll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That's
another thing that's bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he'll
want to go alone. Mark my words! We're going to have trouble when he
comes

"Well, I wish Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back, and let us
get it over," said Pippin. "This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up?

"Where have you been, Boromir? ’ asked Aragorn. "Have you seen Frodo? ’

"This is bad!" cried Sam, jumping up. "I don't know what this Man has
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn't ought to have;
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!"

"How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn.

It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off first.
Merry and Pippin had followed, and were already disappearing westward into
the trees by the shore, shouting: Frodo! Frodo ! in their clear, high
hobbit- voices. Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden panic or madness
seemed to have fallen on the Company.

"We shall all be scattered and lost,’ groaned Aragorn. "Boromir! I do
not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help now! Go after
those two young hobbits, and guard them at the least, even if you cannot
find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I
shall return soon."

Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as he
reached the little lawn among the rowans he overtook him, toiling uphill,
panting and calling, Frodo!

"Come with me, Sam! ’ he said. "None of us should be alone. There is
mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon Hen,
to see what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went
this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path.

"Whoa, Sam Gamgee! ’ he said aloud. "Your legs are too short, so use
your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not his way; but he
hasn't told us everything. Something scared Mr. Frodo badly. He screwed
himself up to the point, sudden. He made up his mind at last to go. Where
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel
hard."

"Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming! ' called Sam, and flung himself from the
bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a yard. With a cry
and a splash he fell face downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went
under, and the River closed over his curly head.

An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and
the boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam by the hair as he
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.

"Up you come, Sam my lad! ’ said Frodo. "Now take my hand! '

"Save me, Mr. Frodo! ’ gasped Sam. "I'm drownded. I can’t see your
hand.’

With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank, and Sam was
able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. Frodo took off the Ring and
stepped ashore again.

’Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard! ’ said Sam shivering. "That’s hard, trying
to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed right, where would you be
now? ’

’It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,’ said Frodo and I
could not have borne that.’

"I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. And I’m coming
with you.’

"Now, Sam,’ said Frodo, 'don’t hinder me! The others will be coming
back at any minute. If they catch me here. I shall have to argue and

Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched his heart.
"Leave one! 'he said. "We'll need it. But you can't come like this without
your gear or food or anything."

"It's all ready. I thought we should be off today." He rushed to the camping
place, fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it when he
emptied the boat of his companions' goods grabbed a spare blanket, and some
extra packages of food, and ran back.

"So all my plan is spoilt! ’ said Frodo. "It is no good trying to
escape you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them
again."

"Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may," said Sam.

So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo
paddled away from the shore, and the River bore them swiftly away, down the
western arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the
great falls drew nearer. Even with such help as Sam could give, it was hard
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive
the boat eastward towards the far shore.

