As is told in The Hobbit , there came one day to Bilbo's door the great
Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed,
than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and his twelve companions in
exile. With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning
of April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great
treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor
in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon that
guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle
of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of renown
were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned
more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an 'accident'
by the way. The party was assailed by Ores in a high pass of the Misty
Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was
lost for a while in the black ore-mines deep under the mountains, and there,
as he groped in vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the
floor of a tunnel. Ele put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck.

Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo's first story, as soon as he heard
it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got
the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while
strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth
important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important,
and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the
first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a 'present' was not mere
hobbitlike invention, all the same. It was suggested to Bilbo, as he
confessed, by Gollum's talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call
the ring his 'birthday present', many times. That also Gandalf thought
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in this point for
many more years, as will be seen in this book.

his return to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf
and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence, or so he
believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of his Journey that he was
writing.

"Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,"
argued the miller, voicing common opinion. "He's often away from home. And
look at the outlandish folk that visit him: dwarves coming at night, and
that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf, and all. You can say what you like,
Gaffer, but Bag End's a queer place, and its folk are queerer."

That was Gandalf s mark, of course, and the old man was Gandalf the
Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due mainly to his skill with fires,
smokes, and lights. His real business was far more difficult and dangerous,
but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just one of the
'attractions' at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children. "G
for Grand!" they shouted, and the old man smiled. They knew him by sight,
though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but
neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had seen one of his
firework displays - they now belonged to the legendary past.

"Run away now!" said Gandalf. "You will get plenty when the time
comes." Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door was shut. The
young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and then made off,

Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window of a
small room looking out west on to the garden. The late afternoon was bright
and peaceful. The flowers glowed red and golden: snap-dragons and
sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in
at the round windows.

"How bright your garden looks!" said Gandalf.

"Who will laugh, I wonder?" said Gandalf, shaking his head.

BUSINESS. Even those who had, or pretended to have Party Business were
seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking off
answers, packing up presents, and making some private preparations of his
own. From the time of Gandalf s arrival he remained hidden from view.

The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought by him, but
designed and made by him; and the special effects, set pieces, and flights
of rockets were let off by him. But there was also a generous distribution
of squibs, crackers, backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles,
elf-fountains, goblin -barkers and thunder -claps. They were all superb. The
art of Gandalf improved with age.

There were rockets like a flight of scintillating birds singing with
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves
opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches
dropped glowing flowers down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with
a sweet scent just before they touched their upturned faces. There were
fountains of butterflies that flew glittering into the trees; there were
pillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into eagles, or sailing
ships, or a phalanx of flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a
shower of yellow rain; there was a forest of silver spears that sprang
suddenly into the air with a yell like an embattled army, and came down
again into the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And there was
also one last surprise, in honour of Bilbo, and it startled the hobbits
exceedingly, as Gandalf intended. The lights went out. A great smoke went
up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow
at the summit. It spouted green and scarlet flames. Out flew a red -golden
dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his
eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzed three times over the
heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell flat on their faces. The
dragon passed like an express train, turned a somersault, and burst over
Bywater with a deafening explosion.

by the hobbits one Gross, though the word was not considered proper to use
of people); and the guests were selected from all the families to which
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with the addition of a few special unrelated
friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and present by
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the
matter of sitting up late, especially when there was a chance of getting
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.

round his waist a worn leather belt. On it he hung a short sword in a
battered black-leather scabbard. From a locked drawer, smelling of
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if
they were very precious, but they were so patched and weatherstained that
their original colour could hardly be guessed: it might have been dark
green. They were rather too large for him. He then went into his study, and
from a large strong-box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths, and a
leather -bound manuscript; and also a large bulky envelope. The book and
bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy bag that was standing there,
already nearly full. Into the envelope he slipped his golden ring, and its
fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At first he put
it on the mantelpiece, but suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his
pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in.

"I am old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in
my heart of hearts. Well-preserved indeed!" he snorted. "Why, I feel all
thin, sort of stretched, if you know what I mean: like butter that has been
scraped over too much bread. That can't be right. I need a change, or

Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. "No, it does not seem
right," he said thoughtfully. "No, after all I believe your plan is probably
the best."

"Well, I've made up my mind, anyway. I want to see mountains again,
Gandalf, mountains, and then find somewhere where I can rest. In peace and
quiet, without a lot of relatives prying around, and a string of confounded
visitors hanging on the bell. I might find somewhere where I can finish my
book. I have thought of a nice ending for it: and he lived happily ever
after to the end of his days. '

Gandalf laughed. I hope he will. But nobody will read the book, however
it ends."

"Everything?" said Gandalf. "The ring as well? You agreed to that, you
remember."

Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his
eyes. "I think, Bilbo," he said quietly, "I should leave it behind. Don't
you want to?"

"No, but I had to badger you," said Gandalf. "I wanted the truth. It
was important. Magic rings are - well, magical; and they are rare and
curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may say; and I
still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also
I think you have had it quite long enough. You won't need it any more.
Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken."

"Yes, yes," said Gandalf. "But there is no need to get angry."

Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. "You will be a fool if you do.

"Now, now, my dear hobbit! ' said Gandalf. "All your long life we have
been friends, and you owe me something. Come! Do as you promised: give it
up! '

Gandalf s eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon," he said.

If you say that again, I shall. Then you will see Gandalf the Grey
uncloaked." He took a step towards the hobbit, and he seemed to grow tall
and menacing; his shadow filled the little room.

his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another, and the air of the
room tingled. Gandalf s eyes remained bent on the hobbit. Slowly his hands
relaxed, and he began to tremble.

"I don’t know what has come over you, Gandalf," he said. "You have
never been like this before. What is it all about? It is mine isn't it? I
found it, and Gollum would have killed me, if I hadn't kept it. I'm not a
thief, whatever he said."

"I have never called you one," Gandalf answered. "And I am not one
either. I am not trying to rob you, but to help you. I wish you would trust
me, as you used." He turned away, and the shadow passed. He seemed to
dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled.

"Then trust mine," said Gandalf. "It is quite made up. Go away and
leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after
him."

"Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the affair,"
said Gandalf.

"No, don’t give the ring to me," said Gandalf. "Put it on the
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait
for him."

It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked
up, sniffing the air. "What fun! What fun to be off again, off on the Road
with dwarves ! This is what I have really been longing for, for years !
Good-bye! ' he said, looking at his old home and bowing to the door.
"Good-bye, Gandalf!"

Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness.
’Goodbye, my dear Bilbo - until our next meeting!" he said softly and went
back indoors.

"Yes," answered Gandalf, 'he has gone at last."

I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end," said
Gandalf. "Don't be too troubled. He'll be all right - now. He left a packet
for you. There it is!"

"It may, and it may not," said Gandalf. "I should not make use of it,
if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed."

"My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!" cried Frodo, running out of the room
to the door. "Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia."

"Don't do that!" said Gandalf, sitting down. "Do be careful of that
ring, Frodo ! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last
word."

"Which story, I wonder," said Gandalf.

"That's interesting," said Gandalf. "Well, what did you think of it
all?"

"So do I," said Gandalf. "And I wonder many other things. Good-bye now!
Take care of yourself! Lookout for me, especially at unlikely times !
Good-bye!"

But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood was that
Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone quite mad, and
had run off into the Blue. There he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a
river and come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame was
mostly laid on Gandalf.

There were rumours of strange things happening in the world outside;
and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several
years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the
Shire, could now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening,
passing and not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and were no
longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road
in unusual numbers. The ancient East -West Road ran through the Shire to its
end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their
mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits' chief source of news
from distant parts - if they wanted any: as a rule dwarves said little and
hobbits asked no more. But now Frodo often met strange dwarves of far
countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in

It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. Then he paid
Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went off again.
During the next year or two he had turned up fairly often, coming
unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise. He
would not discuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chiefly
interested in small news about Frodo's health and doings.

’Ah well eh?" said Gandalf. "You look the same as ever, Frodo!"

"So do you," Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked
older and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide
world, and soon they were deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the
night.

Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when
Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps

He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep in
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.

Gandalf," he said. "And then you stopped, because you said that such matters
were best left until daylight. Don't you think you had better finish now?

"Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure," said Gandalf. "He
would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he thought would
be a danger, even though I promised to look after you. He thought the ring
was very beautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong or

"Very wise," said Gandalf. "But as for his long life, Bilbo never
connected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit for that to
himself, and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and
uneasy. Thin and stretched he said. A sign that the ring was getting
control."

"Known?" said Gandalf. "I have known much that only the Wise know,
Frodo. But if you mean "known about this ring", well, I still do not know,
one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess.

"Maybe not," answered Gandalf. "Hobbits are, or were, no concern of
his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chief of my order and the

"He felt better at once," said Gandalf. "But there is only one Power in
this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I
know there is no Power in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the
Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of
knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be, and yet
sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I think it likely that some would
resist the Rings far longer than most of the Wise would believe. I don't
think you need worry about Bilbo.

"To tell you the truth," replied Gandalf, "I believe that hitherto -
hitherto, mark you - he has entirely overlooked the existence of hobbits.

"It has everything to do with it," said Gandalf. "You do not know the
real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was last
here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for a moment."

Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain
that hung from his belt. He unfastened it and handed it slowly to the
wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in
some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it.

Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid gold. "Can
you see any markings on it?" he asked.

"Well then, look!" To Frodo's astonishment and distress the wizard
threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the fire. Frodo
gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him back.

No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got up,
closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains. The room
became dark and silent, though the clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the
windows, could still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and removed the ring to
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped.

It is quite cool," said Gandalf. "Take it!" Frodo received it on his
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever.

"Hold it up!" said Gandalf. "And look closely!"

"No," said Gandalf, 'but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an ancient
mode, but the language is that of Mordor, which I will not utter here. But
this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough:

"Ah!" said Gandalf. "That is a very long story. The beginnings lie back
in the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If I were to
tell you all that tale, we should still be sitting here when Spring had
passed into Winter.

"So do I," said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. But

"It was taken from him," said Gandalf. "The strength of the Elves to
resist him was greater long ago; and not all Men were estranged from them.
The Men of Westernesse came to their aid. That is a chapter of ancient

Gandalf paused. "And there in the dark pools amid the Gladden Fields,"
he said, 'the Ring passed out of knowledge and legend; and even so much of
its history is known now only to a few, and the Council of the Wise could
discover no more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think.

"It is true all the same," replied Gandalf. "About their origins, at
any rate, I know more than hobbits do themselves. And even Bilbo's story
suggests the kinship. There was a great deal in the background of their
minds and memories that was very similar. They understood one another
remarkably well, very much better than a hobbit would understand, say, a
Dwarf, or an Ore, or even an Elf. Think of the riddles they both knew, for
one thing."

"Only too true, I fear," said Gandalf. "But there was something else in
it, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly ruined. He
had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed -as a hobbit

"But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him angrier in
the end - unless it could be conquered. Unless it could be cured." Gandalf
sighed. "Alas! there is little hope of that for him. Yet not no hope. No,
not though he possessed the Ring so long, almost as far back as he can
remember. For it was long since he had worn it much: in the black darkness
it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never "faded". He is thin and tough
still. But the thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had
become almost unbearable.

"You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have heard,"
said Gandalf. "He hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved himself. He
could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter.

"It is no laughing matter," said Gandalf. "Not for you. It was the
strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far: Bilbo's arrival
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark.

Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much and I have
learned much," he answered. "But I am not going to give an account of all my
doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known
to all the Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire- writing
alone, apart from any other evidence." "And when did you discover that?"
asked Frodo, interrupting. "Just now in this room, of course," answered the
wizard sharply. "But I expected to find it. I have come back from dark
journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof, and
all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the
gap in the history, required some thought. I may have started with guesses
about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him."

"I saw him there," answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered
far, following Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to learn anything from him

"Ah," said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set
out and came back westward, as far as the Great River. But then he turned
aside. He was not daunted by the distance, I am sure. No, something else
drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me.

’Yes, to Mordor," said Gandalf. "Alas! Mordor draws all wicked things,
and the Dark Power was bending all its will to gather them there. The Ring
of the Enemy would leave its mark, too, leave him open to the summons. And
all folk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred
of the West. There were his fine new friends, who would help him in his
revenge !

"But this is terrible!" cried Frodo. "Far worse than the worst that I
imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I
to do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!"

"You have not seen him," Gandalf broke in.

"Try!" said Gandalf. Try now!"

Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. It now
appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device that he could see. The
gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was
its colour, how perfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing and
altogether precious. When he took it out he had intended to fling it from
him into the very hottest part of the fire. But he found now that he could
not do so, not without a great struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand,
hesitating, and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him;
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away -
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket.

Gandalf laughed grimly. "You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily
let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not "make" you - except by
force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking the Ring, force is
useless. Even if you took it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it
would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine.

’Such questions cannot be answered," said Gandalf. "You may be sure
that it was not for any merit that others do not possess: not for power or
wisdom, at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you must therefore use
such strength and heart and wits as you have."

"No!" cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. "With that power I should
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring would gain a power
still greater and more deadly." His eyes flashed and his face was lit as by
a fire within. "Do not tempt me! For I do not wish to become like the Dark
Lord himself. Yet the way of the Ring to my heart is by pity, pity for
weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do not tempt me! I dare not
take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too
great, for my strength. I shall have such need of it. Great perils lie
before me."

There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at his
pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, but under the lids he
was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the
hearth, until they filled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking down
into profound wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled Cracks of Doom
and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.

"Well!" said Gandalf at last. "What are you thinking about? Have you
decided what to do?"

"Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with
that purpose," said Gandalf.

He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to
follow Bilbo flamed up in his heart - to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps to
find him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could almost
have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done
on a similar morning long ago.

"My dear Frodo!" exclaimed Gandalf. "Hobbits really are amazing
creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to know
about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can still
surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such an answer, not even
from you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though he little
thought how important it would prove. I am afraid you are right. The Ring
will not be able to stay hidden in the Shire much longer; and for your own
sake, as well as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of
Baggins behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or
in the Wild. I will give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr.
Underhill.

Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all was
very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the window.
Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long arm out and
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head
hauled by
one ear.

"Well, well, bless my beard!" said Gandalf. "Sam Gamgee is it? Now what
may you be doing?"

"Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!" said Sam. "Nothing! Leastways I was
just trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow me." He
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence.

"I don"t," said Gandalf grimly. It is some time since I last heard the
sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?"

"Don't be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you listen?"
Gandalf s eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.

Suddenly Gandalf laughed. "Come inside!" he shouted, and putting out
both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all,
right through the window and stood him on the floor. "Take you to see Elves,
eh?" he said, eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile flickering on his face.

"It can't be helped, Sam," said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized
that flying from the Shire would mean more painful partings than merely
saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. "I shall have to go.
But' - and here he looked hard at Sam - 'if you really care about me, you
will keep that dead secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of
what you've heard here, then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a spotted
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes."

Sam fell on his knees, trembling. "Get up, Sam!" said Gandalf. I have
thought of something better than that. Something to shut your mouth, and
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!"

"You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon," said Gandalf. Two
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to

"Of course you mustn't vanish!" said Gandalf. "That wouldn't do at all!

To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come
to the point. Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than it had for
years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the
Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think
more kindly of journeying, as it always did at that season. He had indeed
privately made up his mind to leave on his fiftieth birthday: Bilbo's one
hundred and twenty-eighth. It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set
out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one
thing that made the thought of leaving bearable. He thought as little as
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in the end. But he did
not tell all his thoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed was always
difficult to tell.

"Don't be absurd!" said Gandalf. "I am not warning you against leaving
an address at the post-office! But you are leaving the Shire - and that
should not be known, until you are far away. And you must go, or at least

"But you cannot see very far," said Gandalf. "Neither can I. It may be
your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do
not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet."

unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go
about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the Bag End'. But
however a removal might fit in with the designs of his wizardry, there was
no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland.

Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one evening, at
the end of June, soon after Frodo's plan had been finally arranged, he
suddenly announced that he was going off again next morning. "Only for a
short while, I hope," he said. "But I am going down beyond the southern
borders to get some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should."

At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often what
Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in the fine
weather he forgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had seldom seen so
fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey
was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full.

Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about Gandalf
again. September was passing and there was still no news of him. The
Birthday, and the removal, drew nearer, and still he did not come, or send
word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo's friends came to stay and
help him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco Boffin, and

On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland,
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his new home,
by way of the Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became really anxious,
and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning,
dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was
quite small, just a dinner for himself and his four helpers; but he was
troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought that he would so soon have
to part with his young friends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he
would break it to them.

The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the party
soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf s absence. The dining-room was
bare except for a table and chairs, but the food was good, and there was
good wine: Frodo's wine had not been included in the sale to the
Sackville-Bagginses.

When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things they had done
together, they toasted Bilbo's birthday, and they drank his health and
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff
of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodo's party
was over, and Gandalf had not come.

Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo was
restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf. He decided
to wait until nightfall. After that, if Gandalf wanted him urgently, he
would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going
on foot. His plan - for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any
other reason - was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury Ferry, taking it

wandered round the familiar rooms, and saw the light of the sunset fade on
the walls, and shadows creep out of the corners. It grew slowly dark
indoors. He went out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of the path,
and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half expected to see Gandalf
come striding up through the dusk.

walking. I can't bear any more hanging about. I am going to start, and
Gandalf must follow me." He turned to go back, and then slopped, for he
heard voices, just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was
certainly the old Gaffer's; the other was strange, and somehow unpleasant.

They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them from seeing
far. "I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us," said Frodo; but even as
he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide
from the view of the rider came over him.

"It may not matter much," he said apologetically, 'but I would rather
not be seen on the road - by anyone. I am sick of my doings being noticed
and discussed. And if it is Gandalf," he added as an afterthought, 'we can
give him a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let's get out
of sight!"

He felt that he had only to slip it on, and then he would be safe. The
advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. "And I am still in
the Shire," he thought, as his hand touched the chain on which it hung. At
that moment the rider sat up, and shook the reins. The horse stepped
forward, walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot.

"I wish I had waited for Gandalf," Frodo muttered. "But perhaps it
would only have made matters worse."

"It is," said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to
Gandalf and my faithful Sam." He looked down at Sam, who was snoring
gently.

"Has Gandalf told you nothing?"

"I think you should still follow that plan," said Gildor. "I do not
think the Road will prove too hard for your courage. But if you desire
clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do not know the reason for your
flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your pursuers will assail
you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you will see him before
you leave the Shire?"

been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come to Hobbiton at
the

Gildor was silent for a moment. "I do not like this news," he said at
last. "That Gandalf should be late, does not bode well. But it is said: Do
not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to
anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait."

"Is it indeed?" laughed Gildor. "Elves seldom give unguarded advice,
for advice is a dangerous gift, even from the wise to the wise, and all
courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning
yourself; and how then shall I choose better than you? But if you demand
advice, I will for friendship's sake give it. I think you should now go at
once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I
also advise this: do not go alone. Take such friends as are trusty and
willing. Now you should be grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly.

"I am deeply grateful," said Frodo; 'but I wish you would tell me
plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice I may not see
Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know what is the danger that
pursues me."

"I don't altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose me a good
companion. I am content. We will go together."

comical that they laughed. "Dear old Frodo!" said Pippin. "Did you really
think you had thrown dust in all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful
or clever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying
farewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We have constantly
heard you muttering: "Shall I ever look down into that valley again, I
wonder", and things like that. And pretending that you had come to the end
of your money, and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those
Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf."

"Good heavens!" said Frodo. "I thought I had been both careful and
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire discussing my
departure then?"

"Well, as I was saying," Merry proceeded, "I kept my knowledge to
myself, till this Spring when things got serious. Then we formed our
conspiracy; and as we were serious, too, and meant business, we have not
been too scrupulous. You are not a very easy nut to crack, and Gandalf is
worse. But if you want to be introduced to our chief investigator, I can
produce him."

"Yes, sir!" said Sam. "Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant no wrong
to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He has some sense,
mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no! lake someone as you can
trust. '

But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off without a
word. We are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what
Gandalf has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds."

"I don't know," answered Frodo. "I fear those Black Riders, and I am
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place to which
it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to wait. But I should
very much like to see Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed
when he heard that Gandalf had never appeared. It really depends on two
things. Flow soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how soon could
we

"It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy," said Frodo. "But
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?"

Still, I am very glad someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what
you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long."

"Excellent!" said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ’We could not
have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don't know whether
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk
a written message, in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we
have gone, that decides me. I am going into the Old Forest first thing
tomorrow.’

"If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be
lucky," said Frodo. "Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we shall

Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears
than he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down,
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders.

perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so light of what even
Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited for an opportunity, when
the talk was going again, and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers
and their queer ways - then he slipped the Ring on.

Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought
he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought
hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no
longer felt limp like a helpless prey.

At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by the
incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He wondered if he
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find
some way out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, grieving
for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive himself. Gandalf would
admit that there had been nothing else he could do.

for news of a party of hobbits. Could it have been Gandalf? He might have
arrived, while they were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was
something in the look and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.

"Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is,
but he's a good friend of mine, whether or no. But now I don't know what
he'll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into
a block of wood, I shouldn't wonder. He's a bit hasty. Still what's done
can't be undone. '

"Ah, yes ! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked right into my room
without a knock. Barley, he says, I'm off in the morning. Will you do
something for me? You've only to name it, I said. I'm in a hurry, said he,
and I've no time myself, but I want a message took to the Shire. Have you
anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I said, tomorrow,
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow, he says, and then he gave me a
letter.

"A letter for me from Gandalf!" cried Frodo.

'and I beg your pardon. And I'm mortal afraid of what Gandalf will say, if
harm comes of it. But I didn't keep it back a-purpose. I put it by safe.

"Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he says
to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this way
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that!
But you need ask no questions. And if I'm not with him, he may be in
trouble, and he may need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I'll be
grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly."

"Well?" said Strider. "When are you going to open that letter?" Frodo
looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to be
Gandalf s. Inside, written in the wizard's strong but graceful script, was
the following message:

Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam.
"Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!" he said. "He deserves
roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in
Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he
was going into great danger."

Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf s
second postscript. "Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf s friend at
once?" he asked. "It would have saved time."

"They are - at first sight at any rate," laughed Pippin with sudden
relief after reading Gandalf's letter. "But handsome is as handsome does, as
we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much the same after
lying for days in hedges and ditches."

Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed Strider
dubiously. "How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?"
he demanded. "You never mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You
might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with

"Did the verses apply to you then?" asked Frodo. "I could not make out
what they were about. But how did you know that they were in Gandalf s
letter, if you have never seen it?"

chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us.
After Weathertop our journey will become more difficult, and we shall have
to choose between various dangers."

’When did you last see Gandalf?" asked Frodo. "Do you know where he is,
or what he is doing?"

"I am troubled, for the first time since I have known him. We should
have had messages, even if he could not come himself. When I returned, many
days ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone far and wide that
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of
Gildor that told me this; and later they told me that you had left your
home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching
the East Road anxiously."

"Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it - with
Gandalf's absence, I mean?" asked Frodo.

"I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except
the Enemy himself," said Strider. "But do not give up hope ! Gandalf is
greater than you Shire-folk know - as a rule you can only see his jokes and
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task."

"This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later."

While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that
had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and pondering Gandalf's
letter when Strider and Nob returned.

"But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there?"

It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of the
path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light of the October sun, a
grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward slope of the
hill They decided to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad
Concealment was no longer possible, and they could only hope that no enemy
or spy was observing them. Nothing was to be seen moving on the hill. If
Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him.

"Well, here we are!" said Merry. "And very cheerless and uninviting it
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't
blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here."

"The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches," said
Strider. "It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The
scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean
something quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use
runes, and they come here sometimes."

"What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?" asked Merry

"I should say," answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and were a
sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now.

"I wonder if old Gandalf has been here," he said to Pippin. "Whoever it
was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems."

"I was too careless on the hill-top," answered Strider. "I was very
anxious to find some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us
to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see, and the
Riders can use men and other creatures as spies, as we found at Bree. They
themselves do not see the world of light as we do, but our shapes cast
shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun destroys; and in the dark
they perceive many signs and forms that are hidden from us: then they are

"I know only the little that Gandalf has told me," said Frodo slowly.
"Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is
Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land
of '

Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his
companions; he was quaking as if he was bitter cold, but his terror was
swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. Fie did not forget
the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf; but something seemed to be
compelling him to disregard all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt
that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger. Fie could not speak. Fie
felt Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled
for a while; but resistance became unbearable, and at last he slowly drew
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand.

"You must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had
guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and
I think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his enemies
expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am
away!" He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness.

The others were discussing this very question. They quickly decided to
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. "I think now," said Strider, 'that the
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here,
then he must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. In any
case we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night,
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go."

Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the hobbits,
and then even Frodo laughed. "Well!" he said. "We are forgetting our family
history! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf,
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit."

In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were probably
following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many
years before. After a few miles they came out on the top of a high bank
above the Road. At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and
winding eastward among woods and heather -covered slopes towards the Ford
and

"Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?" cried Frodo joyfully.

"No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago," answered
Glorfindel. "Elrond received news that troubled him. Some of my kindred,
journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin,* learned that things were
amiss, and sent messages as swiftly as they could. They said that the Nine
were abroad, and that you were astray bearing a great burden without
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that
can ride openly against the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out
north, west, and south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.

"Gandalf!" cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window.

"Yes," he said, "I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after
all the absurd things you have done since you left home." Frodo lay down
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did
not think he would get the better of an argument. He was fully awake now,
and the memory of his journey was returning: the disastrous 'short cut'
through the Old Forest the 'accident' at The Prancing Pony ; and his madness
in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his
arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft
puffs of Gandalf s pipe, as he blew white smoke -rings out of the window.

"Yes, they are all safe and sound," answered Gandalf. "Sam was here
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago."

"Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade," answered Gandalf. "The
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have
been

"You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo," said Gandalf gently, 'and
it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory. Do not worry!
Though I said "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and
of the others. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such
dangers, still bearing the Ring."

"I was delayed," said Gandalf, 'and that nearly proved our ruin. And
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so."

"You will soon hear all you wish to know," said Gandalf. "We shall have
a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I will only say
that I was held captive."

"Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey," said the wizard solemnly. "There are many
powers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater than I am.
Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time is coming. The
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!"

Gandalf smiled. V I have heard all about Sam," he said. "He has no more
doubts now."

"You don't know much even about them, if you think old Barliman is
stupid," said Gandalf. "He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks less
than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (as
they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure."

"Only a Ranger!" cried Gandalf. "My dear Frodo, that is just what the
Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people, the Men of
the West. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the
days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at
rest."

"You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you," said Gandalf.
"How do the side and shoulder feel now?’

"Good!" said Gandalf. "It is mending fast. You will soon be sound
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were
brought in."

Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that
had vanished in Strider's hands. "Don't be alarmed!" said Gandalf. "It is
gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very
reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would
quickly have been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen
days.’

"Yes, fortune or fate have helped you," said Gandalf, 'not to mention
courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced;
and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow
shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for
then you were half in the wraith- world yourself, and they might have seized
you. You could see them, and they could see you.’

Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo.

"Still that must be expected," said Gandalf to himself. "He is not half
through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond can
foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass filled with a
clear light for eyes to see that can."

"No," said Gandalf. "Their horses must have perished, and without them
they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so easily
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your
friends crossed after the flood had passed; and they found you lying on your
face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under you. The horse was

"Elrond commanded it," answered Gandalf. "The river of this valley is
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the
Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the
flood was released. If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you
may not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white
horses with shining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding
boulders. For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand and wash you all away. There is
great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty
Mountains."

Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. "Yes, you
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to
celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in
places of honour."

"Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf, smiling.

"It's warm!" said Sam. "Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so
cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried, turning
round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. ’It's fine to see
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking."

"Hush!" said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. "Evil
things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should not name
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of
Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’

"Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said Pippin.

"More than meal! A feast!’ said Merry. "As soon as Gandalf reported
that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had hardly finished
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells.

The hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves for the most
part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was his
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.

Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of
whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were
revealed

as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other
two; but his long white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged
face under great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could
leap suddenly into fire.

"You have had some very strange adventures, I hear," said Gluin. "I
wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey. Nothing like
it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?"

Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. "This is the Hall of Fire'
said the wizard. "Here you will hear many songs and tales-if you can keep
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people
come here who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all
the year round, but there is little other light."

course. Gandalf has been here often. Not that he has told me a great deal,
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It is a pity that
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I could have brought the thing here
myself long ago without so much trouble. I have thought several times of
going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let
me: Gandalf and Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught
me

"And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do no good
to you or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again." Odd sort of
remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let
things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound." He paused and
looked at Frodo doubtfully.

"Quite right, Sam," laughed Bilbo. "You can trot off and tell Gandalf
that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been good
to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good
talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to
see your chapters of our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I think, and
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!"

On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came upon
Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. "Hullo! Good morning!" said Bilbo. "Feel
ready for the great council?’

"You may have a chance later," said Gandalf. "But we cannot make any
plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today."

Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. "That is
the warning bell for the Council of Elrond," cried Gandalf. "Come along now!
Both you and Bilbo are wanted."

Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends the
evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the
valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from the foaming river-bed.
Birds were singing, and a wholesome peace lay on the land. To Frodo his
dangerous flight, and the rumours of the darkness growing in the world
outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces
that were turned to meet them as they entered were grave.

"Here," said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, 'is Boromir, a man from the
South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I have bidden
him to be present, for here his questions will be answered."

"Bring out the Ring, Frodo!" said Gandalf solemnly. "The time has come.
Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle."

"Yes, it made quite a long tale," answered Frodo. "But the story still
does not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal, especially
about Gandalf."

I had not overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it
is the part of Gandalf to make clear; and I call upon him last, for it is
the place of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief."

"Some, Galdor," said Gandalf, 'would think the tidings of Gluin, and
the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the halfling's trove is a thing of
great worth to the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the Nazgyl
keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed." At this Gluin stirred, but did not
speak. "The Three we know of. What then is this one that he desires so much?

Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of
the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long
lain hidden. He sighed.

"From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew,"
said Gandalf, 'and I desired to know how this thing came to Gollum, and how
long he had possessed it. So I set a watch for him, guessing that he would
ere long come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but
he escaped and was not found. And then alas ! I let the matter rest, watching
and waiting only, as we have too often done.

"And I," said Aragorn, 'counselled that we should hunt for Gollum. too
late though it may seem. And since it seemed fit that Isildur's heir should
labour to repair Isildur's fault, I went with Gandalf on the long and
hopeless search."

Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland,
down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. "There we
had

"But in that time also he made this scroll," said Gandalf; 'and that is
not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns the Ring,

Marshes I followed it, and then I had him. Lurking by a stagnant mere,
peering in the water as the dark eve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was
covered with green slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and
I was not gentle. Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks
of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of all my journey, the road back,
watching him day and night, making him walk before me with a halter on his
neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever
towards Mirkwood. I brought him there at last and gave him to the Elves, for
we had agreed that this should be done; and I was glad to be rid of his
company, for he stank. For my part I hope never to look upon him again; but
Gandalf came and endured long speech with him.’

"Yes, long and weary," said Gandalf, 'but not without profit. For one
thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now
told openly for the first time; but that mattered little, since I had
already guessed it. But I learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of
the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also that he had
possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring had
lengthened his years far beyond their span; but that power only the Great
Rings wield.

"Never before has any voice dared to utter the words of that tongue in
Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,’ said Elrond, as the shadow passed and the
company breathed once more.

"And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again," answered
Gandalf. "Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon, Master Elrond. For if that
tongue is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West, then let all put
doubt aside that this thing is indeed what the Wise have declared: the

"Not through lack of watchfulness," said Legolas; 'but perhaps through
over -kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others, and that
more is known of our doings than we could wish. We guarded this creature day
and night, at Gandalf s bidding, much though we wearied of the task. But
Gandalf bade us hope still for his cure, and we had not the heart to keep
him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall back into his old
black thoughts."

"Now come!" said Gandalf. "Pray do not interrupt, my good Gluin. That
was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the grievances
that stand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought up here, we may as
well abandon this Council."

"Well, well, he is gone," said Gandalf. "We have no time to seek for
him again. He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet that neither
he nor Sauron have foreseen.

' "Gandalf ! " he cried. "I was seeking you. But I am a stranger in
these parts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region with
the uncouth name of Shire."

' "Stay a moment! " I said. "We shall need your help, and the help of
all things that will give it. Send out messages to all the beasts and birds
that are your friends. Tell them to bring news of anything that bears on
this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc."

"So you have come, Gandalf," he said to me gravely; but in his eyes
there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart.

' "Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey l " he scoffed. "For aid? It has
seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought for aid, one so cunning
and so wise, wandering about the lands, and concerning himself in every
business, whether it belongs to him or not."

v "Radagast the Brown! " laughed Saruman, and he no longer concealed
his scorn. "Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool!
Yet he had just the wit to play the part that I set him. For you have come,
and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay, Gandalf
the Grey, and rest from journeys. For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman
Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours! "

' "And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper! " he said, coming
near and speaking now in a softer voice. "I said we, for we it may be, if
you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old allies and
policies will not avail us at all. There is no hope left in Elves or dying
N®menor. This then is one choice before you. before us. We may join with
that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that way. Its victory
is at hand; and there will be rich reward for those that aided it. As the
Power grows, its proved friends will also grow; and the Wise, such as you
and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses, to control it.

"He came and laid his long hand on my arm. "And why not, Gandalf? " he
whispered. "Why not? The Ruling Ring? If we could command that, then the
Power would pass to us. That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have
many eyes in my service, and I believe that you know where this precious
thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what
is your business there? " As he said this a lust which he could not conceal
shone suddenly in his eyes.

' "Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may find means
to persuade you. Or until it is found in your despite, and the Ruler has
time to turn to lighter matters: to devise, say, a fitting reward for the
hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey."

Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. "It was only a dream' said
Frodo, 'but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite forgotten it. It came
some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think."

"Then it was late in coming," said Gandalf, 'as you will see. I was in
an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom been in
such need, and do not bear such misfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught
like a fly in a spider's treacherous web! Yet even the most subtle spiders
may leave a weak thread.

’True indeed!’ said Gandalf. "And there is one among them that might
have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of the Nine cannot
vie with him; tireless, swift as the flowing wind. Shadowfax they called
him. By day his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade,
and he passes unseen. Light is his footfall! Never before had any man
mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and so speedily he bore me that
I reached the Shire when Frodo was on the Barrow-downs, though I set out
from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton.

Gandalf laughed. "Don't be afraid!" he said. "I did not bite, and I
barked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of him,
when he stopped quaking, that I embraced the old fellow. How it happened I
could not then guess, but I learned that you had been in Bree the night
before, and had gone off that morning with Strider.

"And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond and the others
forgive the length of it. But such a thing has not happened before, that
Gandalf broke tryst and did not come when he promised. An account to the
Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required, I think.

"He would not have come," said Gandalf.

"No, I should not put it so,’ said Gandalf. "Say rather that the Ring
has no power over him. He is his own master. But he cannot alter the Ring
itself, nor break its power over others. And now he is withdrawn into a
little land, within bounds that he has set, though none can see them,
waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not step beyond them."

"No,’ said Gandalf, 'not willingly. He might do so, if all the free
folk of the world begged him, but he would not understand the need. And if
he were given the Ring, he would soon forget it, or most likely throw it
away. Such things have no hold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe
guardian; and that alone is answer enough.’

"But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any craft
that we here possess,’ said Elrond. "And they who dwell beyond the Sea would
not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who
still dwell here to deal with it.’

"Not safe for ever," said Gandalf. "There are many things in the deep
waters; and seas and lands may change. And it is not our part here to take
thought only for a season, or for a few lives of Men, or for a passing age
of the world. We should seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not
hope to make one.’

"Nor I," said Gandalf.

"Balin will find no ring in Moria," said Gandalf. "Thrur gave it to
Thrbin his son, but not Thrbin to Thorin. It was taken with torment from
Thrbin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late."

"Despair, or folly?" said Gandalf. "It is not despair, for despair is

"Of course, my dear Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. "If you had really started
this affair, you might be expected to finish it. But you know well enough
now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only a small part
is played in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was
meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiant offer.

"Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!" said Gandalf,
looking in through the window, which was near the ground. "But you are all
worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided yet."

"Talking,' said Bilbo. "There was a deal of talk, and everyone had an
eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas's bit of news about Gollum
caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off."

"You were wrong," said Gandalf. "You were inattentive. I had already
heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as
you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only one that was not
surprised."

"Well, anyway," said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor
Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I
was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the
reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?"

"I am afraid it will," said Gandalf. "We can't start until we have
found out about the Riders."

"You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that," said Gandalf. "The power of
their master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We hope that they
were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous; but
we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to help you; but I will
whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in
the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you."

So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the
window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat and bowed. "I
only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me,
I want to see Elrond. I must be off."

"How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to Bilbo when
Gandalf had gone.

’Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least," said Gandalf. "It
is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we may hope now that the
Ringwraiths were scattered, and have been obliged to return as best they
could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.

"The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers shall be
set against the Nine Riders that are evil. With you and your faithful
servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and maybe the
end of his labours.

"Neither does Frodo," said Gandalf, unexpectedly supporting Pippin.

Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of their road and
the perils they would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with
them; but he was content to lean on their guidance, and he spent as much
time as he could with Bilbo.

Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, for
dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed axe.
Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white knife. The
younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from the barrow; but
Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden.
Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was the elven-sword Glamdring,
the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely
Mountain.

Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire, and they
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A
gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in
many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the doorstep beside
Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey shapes in the
darkness.

At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the Company
to him. "This is my last word," he said in a low voice. "The Ring-bearer is
setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him alone is any charge laid:
neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy
nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the Company and the
Council, and only then in gravest need. The others go with him as free
companions, to help him on his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn

Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this land
even in the dark. The others were in file behind, and Legolas whose eyes
were keen was the rearguard. The first part of their journey was hard and
dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the wind. For many sunless
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed
able to keep out its searching fingers. Though the Company was well clad,
they seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during

Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. "We have
done well,’ he said. "We have reached the borders of the country that Men
call Hollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when Eregion was its
name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many
long miles further our feet have walked. The land and the weather will be
milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.’

"No," said Gandalf. "But you see further ahead in the clear light.

"It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making," said Gandalf. "If we
climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side of
Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the
Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises in
its icy springs.’

"May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf f said Gandalf. "But
whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down
the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the Great River, and then

"To the end of the journey — in the end," said Gandalf. "We cannot
look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the first stage is safely over. I
think we will rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There is a

Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. "But what do you guess is the
reason?’ he asked. "Is there more in it than surprise at seeing four
hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen or
heard?’

"Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ’If you bring a Ranger
with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the Ranger is
Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.’

Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west, and the
sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he sprang up and went and
wakened Gandalf.

"And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate," said Gandalf; 'and how we
can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of
that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you
are right."

"Well, you can go on looking forward," said Gandalf. "There may be many

"Did you see anything pass over?" he whispered to Gandalf, who was just
ahead.

There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. The wind had
gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked back.

Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and Aragorn
were continuing some debate that had begun long before. He listened
anxiously.

"I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well,
Gandalf," answered Aragorn. "And perils known and unknown will grow as we
go

"Who knows indeed!" said Gandalf. "But there is another way, and not by
the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.’

"We must decide before we go further," answered Gandalf.

Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its
sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in grey cloud. Frodo
watched them, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned
to

the Company Gandalf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face
the weather and the high pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was
the other dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned.

"From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ’I fear that the

"Very well," said Gandalf. "But we must not use the wood — not unless
it is a choice between fire and death."

They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, filling all
the air, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and
Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.

Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; it was
already ankle-deep about his boots.

"His arm has grown long," said Gandalf.

"It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack;
said Gandalf.

"Either stop where we are, or go back," said Gandalf. ’It is no good
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves the
cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long hard
slope. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones — or anything
else."

"This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf," said Boromir. "It
is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must do
something to save ourselves.’

"Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out a
leathern flask. "Just a mouthful each — for all of us. It is very precious.

’What do you say to fire?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ’The choice seems
near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden from
all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us, but that will not help
us.’

’You may make a fire, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ’If there are any
watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, fire or no.’ But
though they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice of Boromir, it
passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid
the swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel. At last reluctantly Gandalf
himself took a hand. Picking up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and
then with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen ! he thrust the end of his
staff into the midst of it. At once a great spout of green and blue flame
sprang out, and the wood flared and sputtered.

"If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’ he
said. ’I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’

"If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a
path for you," said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone
of the Company remained still light of heart.

"If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to save
us,’ answered Gandalf. "But I must have something to work on. I cannot burn
snow.’

"Farewell!" he said to Gandalf. "I go to find the Sun!" Then swift as a
runner over firm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the toiling men,
with a wave of his hand he passed them, and sped into the distance, and
vanished round the rocky turn.

After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow but
now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli perched among
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane;
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled
down a fall of stones and slithering snow. The spray of it half blinded the
Company as they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again
they saw that the path was blocked behind them.

That cannot be helped now,’ said Gandalf. "Whether they are good or
evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down at once. Not
even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!’

It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when they
halted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were veiled in
deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more
mouthful

"We still have our journey and our errand before us," answered Gandalf.

"You are right, Frodo," said Gandalf: 'to go back is to admit defeat
and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring must remain
there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell
will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time it will be destroyed.

"There is a way that we may attempt," said Gandalf. I thought from the
beginning, when first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But
it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before.
Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had at least been
tried."

"The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria," said Gandalf.

"Things have changed since you came north, Boromir," answered Gandalf.
"Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him I may have business
of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that
can by any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closed to us while we go
with the Bearer.

"You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to the
stronghold of Sauron," answered Gandalf. "I alone of you have ever been in
the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in his older and lesser dwelling in
Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-dyr do not return. But I would
not lead you into Moria if there were no hope of coming out again. If there
are Ores there, it may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Ores
of the Misty Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five
Armies. The Eagles report that Ores are gathering again from afar; but there
is a hope that Moria is still free.

’I will tread the path with you, Gandalf! ’ said Gimli. ’I will go and
look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there-if you can find the
doors that are shut.’

"Good, Gimli! ' said Gandalf. "You encourage me. We will seek the
hidden doors together. And we will come through. In the ruins of the
Dwarves, a dwarfs head will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men or
Hobbits. Yet it will not be the first time that I have been to Moria. I
sought there long for Thrbin son of Thrur after he was lost. I passed
through, and I came out again alive! ’

"Of course not! ' said Gandalf. "Who would? But the question is: who
will follow me, if I lead you there? '

"I will," said Aragorn heavily. "You followed my lead almost to
disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. I will follow your
lead now — if this last warning does not move you. It is not of the Ring,
nor of us others that I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to
you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware! ’

The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. "I
do not wish to go," he said; 'but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of
Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slept on it.
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold
gloom. How the wind howls ! '

"Need we wait until morning then? ' said Gandalf. "It is as I said. The
hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journey
south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? ’

"There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some fifteen miles as the
crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs," answered Gandalf grimly.

"My heart's right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin," said Sam. "But we
aren't etten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever may
be in store for old Gandalf, I'll wager it isn't a wolfs belly."

Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. "Listen,

Hound of Sauron! ’ he cried. "Gandalf is here. Fly, if you value your foul
skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring."

The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great leap. At that
moment there was a sharp twang. Legolas had loosed his bow. There was a
hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to the ground; the elvish arrow
had pierced its throat. The watching eyes were suddenly extinguished.
Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting
packs had fled. All about them the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on
the sighing wind.

"Fling fuel on the fire!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. "Draw your
blades, and stand back to back!’

In the wavering firelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose up,
a great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of stone set
upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to
meet the wolves. They gave back before him. High in the air he tossed the
blazing brand. It flared with a sudden white radiance like lightning; and
his voice rolled like thunder.

"It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. "These were no ordinary wolves
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!’

"We must reach the doors before sunset,’ said Gandalf, ’or I fear we
shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be winding, for
here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in this country, and only
once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago.

"I do not know which to hope," said Boromir grimly: 'that Gandalf will
find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost
for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall
the likeliest chance. Lead on!’

Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard’s side, so eager was he to come to
Moria. Together they led the Company back towards the mountains. The only
road of old to Moria from the west had lain along the course of a stream,
the Sirannon, that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors
had stood. But either Gandalf was astray, or else the land had changed in
recent years; for he did not strike the stream where he looked to find it,
only a few miles southwards from their start.

’Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. "This is where the stream ran:

"Indeed things have changed! ' said Gandalf. "But there is no mistaking
the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I remember
right, there was a flight of steps cut in the rock at their side, but the
main road wound away left and climbed with several loops up to the level
ground at the top. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right
up to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it with the road
beside it. Let us go and see what things are like now ! '

They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftly
up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached the top they saw
that they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up of
the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind them the sinking Sun filled the cool
western sky with glimmering gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake.
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had
been dammed and had filled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were
reared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: final and
impassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a fissure or crack could Frodo
see in the frowning stone.

"There are the Walls of Moria," said Gandalf, pointing across the
water. "And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door at the end
of the road from Flollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None
of the Company, I guess, will wish to swim this gloomy water at the end of
the day. It has an unwholesome look.’

"But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,’ said
Gandalf. "The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are places
narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.’

"I am sorry," said Gandalf. "Poor Bill has been a useful companion and
it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter

The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in the sky
high above the sunset, when the Company, with all the speed they could,
climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked
to be no more than two or three furlongs at the widest point. How far it
stretched away southward they could not see in the failing light; but its
northern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and between
the stony ridges that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a
rim of open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two
to go before they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was
making for; and then he had still to find the doors.

Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed as
quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry land between the lake
and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a dozen yards across, and
encumbered with fallen rock and stones; but they found a way, hugging the
cliff, and keeping as far from the dark water as they might. A mile
southwards along the shore they came upon holly trees. Stumps and dead
boughs were rotting in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets,
or of a hedge that had once lined the road across the drowned valley. But
close under the cliff there stood, still strong and living, . two tall
trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined.

"Well, here we are at last! 'said Gandalf. "Here the Elven-way from
Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they
planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West -door was made
chiefly for their use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those were
happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of
different race, even between Dwarves and Elves."

"I have heard both," said Gandalf; 'and I will not give judgement now.

"But you can't leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place, Mr.
Gandalf! ' cried Sam, angry and distressed. "I won't have it, and that's
flat. After he has come so far and all ! '

"It will be short of murder, I hope," said Gandalf. He laid his hand on
the pony's head, and spoke in a low voice. "Go with words of guard and
guiding on you,’ he said. "You are a wise beast, and have learned much in

When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He appeared to have
done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall
of the cliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with his eyes. Gimli was
wandering about, tapping the stone here and there with his axe. Legolas was
pressed against the rock, as if listening.

"But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves," said
Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning round. "Unless things are
altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.’

At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of interlacing
letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the threads were in places
blurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and a hammer

"And the Star of the House of Flanor," said Gandalf. "They are wrought
of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and sleeps until it
is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is
long since I heard them, and I thought deeply before I could recall them to
my mind.’

"The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth in the
Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ’But they do not say anything of importance
to us. They say only: The Doors ofDurin, Lord ofMoria. Speak, friend, and
enter. And underneath small and faint is written: I, Narvi, made them.
Celebrimbor ofHollin drew these signs."

’Yes," said Gandalf, 'these doors are probably governed by words. Some
dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular persons; and
some have locks and keys that are still needed when all necessary times and
words are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not
secret. They usually stood open and doorwards sat here. But if they were
shut, any who knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At least so
it is recorded, is it not, Gimli? '

’But do not you know the word, Gandalf? ’ asked Boromir in surprise.

The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf well,
remained silent and unmoved.

"Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took," said Gandalf. "But
if that does not shatter them, and I am allowed a little peace from foolish
questions, I will seek for the opening words.

Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms he spoke in
tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and struck the rock
with his staff. Open, open! he shouted, and followed it with the same
command in every language that had ever been spoken in the West of

"Why doesn't Gandalf do something quick? ' said Pippin.

Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head bowed, either in
despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the wolves was heard
again. The ripples on the water grew and came closer; some were already
lapping on the shore.

V I was wrong after all," said Gandalf, 'and Gimli too. Merry, of all
people, was on the right track. The opening word was inscribed on the
archway all the time! The translation should have been: Say "Friend" and
enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend and the doors opened.
Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days.

"Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick! ' shouted Gandalf leaping
back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to
the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.

They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up, and
Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed across
the narrow shore and fingered the cliff- wall and the doors. One came
wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned
and paused. If he was considering what word would close the gate again from
within, there was no need. Many coiling arms seized the doors on either
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo
they slammed, and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came
dully through the ponderous stone.

They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his staff against
the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but the
doors did not open. "Well, well! ’ said the wizard. "The passage is blocked
behind us now and there is only one way out— on the other side of the
mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up, and the
trees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the trees were

"I do not know," answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by one
purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark waters under
the mountains. There are older and fouler things than Ores in the deep
places of the world." He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever it
was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on Frodo first among all the
Company.

"I will," said Gandalf, 'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff!

The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the upper steps,
dim figures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf gave them each a
third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell.

"I cannot say," answered Gandalf. "It depends on many chances. But
going straight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or

After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager
to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and were willing, tired as
they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf walked in
front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light
of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his
sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in the dim light
as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting
or of Glamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish
smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Ores
were near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and the
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked
Aragorn.

Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. At least
he was not, as were most of the others, troubled by the mere darkness in
itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was
doubtful; but it was always Gandalf who had the final word. The Mines of
Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli, Gluin's son,
dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of
a journey long before were now of little help, but even in the gloom and
despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did
not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards his goal.

"Do not be afraid! ' said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than usual,
and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together; the others were crowded
behind, waiting anxiously. "Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a
journey, if never on one so dark; and there are tales of Rivendell of
greater deeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray-if

As these dangers became more frequent their march became slower.
Already they seemed to have been tramping on, on, endlessly to the
mountains' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort
in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo's spirits had risen for a while
after his escape, and after food and a draught of the cordial; but now a
deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept over him again. Though he had been
healed in Rivendell of the knife-stroke, that grim wound had not been
without effect. His senses were sharper and more aware of things that could
not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could
see more in the dark than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And
he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain against
his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of
evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He gripped tighter on
the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.

It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. They had been
going for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf came to his
first serious check. Before him stood a wide dark arch opening into three
passages: all led in the same general direction, eastwards; but the
left-hand passage plunged down, while the right-hand climbed up, and the
middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow.

"I have no memory of this place at all!" said Gandalf, standing
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of finding some
marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind was
to be seen. I am too weary to decide," he said, shaking his head. "And I
expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better halt
here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever
dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and the middle-night has
passed."

"Steady! Steady! ' cried Gandalf as Merry and Pippin pushed forward,
glad to find a place where they could rest with at least more feeling of
shelter than in the open passage. "Steady! You do not know what is inside
yet. I will go first.’

"What's that? ' cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin confessed
what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see his eye glinting.
’Fool of a Took! ' he growled. "This is a serious journey, not a hobbit
walking -party. Throw yourself in next time, and then you will be no further
nuisance. Now be quiet! '

"Yes," said Gandalf, 'and I do not like it. It may have nothing to do
with Peregrin's foolish stone; but probably something has been disturbed
that would have been better left quiet. Pray, do nothing of the kind again!

Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he kept on
turning round, fearing that some unknown thing would crawl up out of the
well. He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket, but he
dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep.

Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was deep
in thought, trying to recall every memory of his former journey in the
Mines, and considering anxiously the next course that he should take; a
false turn now might be disastrous. After an hour he rose up and came over
to Pippin.

It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had sat and watched
all alone for about six hours, and had let the others rest. "And in the
watches I have made up my mind," he said. "I do not like the feel of the
middle way; and I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul
air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage. It is
time we began to climb up again."

Gandalf seemed pleased. "I chose the right way," he said. "At last we

"That is all that I shall venture on for the present," said Gandalf.

"Piles of jewels? ' said Gandalf. "No. The Ores have often plundered
Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled,
no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: they
are drowned in water— or in a shadow of fear."

’For mithrif answered Gandalf. "The wealth of Moria was not in gold
and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things
they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did not need to delve
for them: all things that they desired they could obtain in traffic. For
here alone in the world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some have
called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do
not tell. Its worth was ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price;
for little is left above ground, and even the Ores dare not delve here for
it. The lodes lead away north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The
Dwarves tell no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their
wealth, so also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too
deep, and disturbed that from which they fled, Durin’s Bane. Of what they
brought to light the Ores have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute
to Sauron, who covets it.

"Yes," said Gandalf. I never told him, but its worth was greater than
the value of the whole Shire and everything in it."

Frodo sat up. "Good morning! 'said Gandalf: "For morning it is again
at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side of Moria.
Before today is over we ought to find the Great Gates and see the waters of
Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us."

After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once. "We
are tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,’ he said. "I think
that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.’

’Maybe,’ said Gandalf. "But I du not know yet exactly where we are.
Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are above and to the north of the
Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The
eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but before
we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light
in the north door. If we could find a window it would help, but I fear that
the light comes only down deep shafts.’

"It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a
curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven:

These are Daeron's Runes, such as were used of old in Moria," said
Gandalf. "Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:
balin son of fundin
lord of moria."

There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them were
large iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and plundered; but
beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been
slashed and stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained with black and
other dark marks like old blood that little of it could be read. Gandalf
lifted it carefully, but the leaves crackled and broke as he laid it on the
slab. He pored over it for some time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli
standing at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they
were written by many different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale,
and here and there in Elvish script.

At last Gandalf looked up. "It seems to be a record of the fortunes of
Balin's folk," he said. V I guess that it began with their coming to Dimrill
Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the pages seem to have numbers referring to
the years after their arrival. The top page is marked one — three, so at
least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!

"Well, I can read no more for a long way," said Gandalf, ’except the
word gold , and Darin 's Axe and something helm. Then Balin is now lord of
Morici. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars another hand begins,
and I can see we found truesilver, and later the word wellforged and then
something, I have it! mithril; and the last two lines Uin to seek for the
upper armouries of Third Deep, something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin
gate'

Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. "There are several pages of
the same sort, rather hastily written and much damaged, he said; 'but I can
make little of them in this light. Now there must be a number of leaves
missing, because they begin to be numbered five, the fifth year of the
colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I cannot
read them. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a
large bold hand using an Elvish script.’

"I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand," said Gandalf.

"It is grim reading," he said. "I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We
cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second
hall. Frbr and Luni and Nbli fell there. Then there are four lines smeared
so that I can only read went 5 days ago. The last lines run the pool is up
to the wall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took Uin. We cannot get
out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the deep. I wonder what that
means. The last thing written is in a trailing scrawl of elf-letters: they
are coming. There is nothing more." Gandalf paused and stood in silent

Gandalf raised his head and looked round. "They seem to have made a
last stand by both doors," he said; 'but there were not many left by that
time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The
time is not come yet. Now, I fear, we must say farewell to Balin son of
Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take this
book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at it more closely later. You had
better keep it, Gimli, and take it back to Dbin, if you get a chance. It
will interest him, though it will grieve him deeply. Come, let us go! The
morning is passing."

"Back to the hall," answered Gandalf. "But our visit to this room has
not been in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as Gimli says, the
Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end.
Therefore we should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear right
and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first Hall should be on the Seventh
Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!

Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great noise: a
rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths far below, and to tremble in
the stone at their feet. They sprang towards the door in alarm. Doom, doom
it rolled again, as if huge hands were turning the very caverns of Moria
into a vast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great horn was blown
in the hall, and answering horns and harsh cries were heard further off.

"Trapped! ' cried Gandalf. "Why did I delay? Here we are, caught, just
as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what — '

"No! ' said Gandalf. "We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar!

"Wait a moment! Do not close it yet! ' said Gandalf. He sprang forward
to Boromir's side and drew himself up to his full height.

With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the narrow opening of the
door and thrust forward his staff: There was a dazzling flash that lit the
chamber and the passage outside. For an instant the wizard looked out.
Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back.

"Now is the time! ' cried Gandalf. "Let us go, before the troll
returns!"

"Now! ' shouted Gandalf. "Now is the last chance. Run for it! '

"Not yet! ' said Gandalf. "But there is time for wonder. Off you go,
all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if
I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose paths leading right and
downwards."

"Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely. "Swords are no more use here.

The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their
way down a long flight of steps, and then looked back; but they could see
nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer of the wizard's staff. He
seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed door. Frodo breathed
heavily and leaned against Sam, who put his arms about him. They stood
peering up the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear the
voice of Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with
a sighing echo. He could not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be
trembling. Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom,
doom.

doom-boom, doom-boom, and then stopped. Gandalf came flying down the
steps

the drum-beats again: they now sounded muffled and far away, but they were
following. There was no other sound of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor
any voice. Gandalf took no turns, right or left, for the passage seemed to
be going in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended
a flight of steps, fifty or more, to a lower level. At the moment that was
their chief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they
came on it, and put their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the ground
with his staff like a blind man.

At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, and
had descended many flights of stairs. There was still no sound of pursuit.
Almost they began to hope that they would escape. At the bottom of the
seventh flight Gandalf halted.

’I do not know," answered Gandalf. "But I found myself suddenly faced
by something that I have not met before. I could think of nothing to do but
to try and put a shutting -spell on the door. I know many; but to do things
of that kind rightly requires time, and even then the door can be broken by
strength.

’You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. "There is more about you than
meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if the remark
meant more than it said.

' Ghvsh !" muttered Gandalf. "I wonder if that is what they meant: that
the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.’

When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing to them to
wait. As he stood just beyond the opening they saw his face lit by a red
glow. Quickly he stepped back.

"If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we should
have been trapped here," said Gandalf. "Let us hope that the fire now lies
between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose."

"Now for the last race! ’ said Gandalf. "If the sun is shining outside
we may still escape. After me! '

"Look ahead! ' called Gandalf. "The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and

Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall the
floor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door could only be
reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the
chasm with one curving spring of fifty feet. It was an ancient defence of
the Dwarves against any enemy that might capture the First Hall and the
outer passages. They could only pass across it in single file. At the brink
Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind.

Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang back. Another
pierced Gandalf s hat and stuck there like a black feather. Frodo looked
behind. Beyond the fire he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to be
hundreds of ores. They brandished spears and scimitars which shone red as
blood in the firelight. Doom, doom rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and
louder, doom, doom.

"A Balrog," muttered Gandalf. "Now I understand." He faltered and
leaned heavily on his staff. "What an evil fortune! And I am already weary."

"Over the bridge!" cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. "Fly ! This is
a foe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow way. Fly! ' Aragorn and
Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side,
behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others halted just within
the doorway at the hall's end, and turned, unable to leave their leader to
face the enemy alone.

The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the span,
leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand Glamdring
gleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow
about it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the thongs
whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But Gandalf stood firm.

The Balrog made no answer. The fire in it seemed to die, but the
darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to the bridge, and suddenly it
drew itself up to a great height, and its wings were spread from wall to
wall; but still Gandalf could be seen, glimmering in the gloom; he seemed
small, and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a wizened tree before the
onset of a storm.

"He cannot stand alone! ' cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the
bridge. "Elendil!" he shouted. "I am with you, Gandalf! '

At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote the
bridge before him. The staff broke asunder and fell from his hand. A
blinding sheet of white flame sprang up. The bridge cracked. Right at the
Balrog's feet it broke, and the stone upon which it stood crashed into the
gulf, while the rest remained, poised, quivering like a tongue of rock
thrust out into emptiness.

"Alas! I Fear we cannot stay here longer," said Aragorn. He looked
towards the mountains and held up his sword. "Farewell, Gandalf ! ' he cried.
"Did I not say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, bewarel Alas that I
spoke true! What hope have we without you? '

"Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many other
mountain- streams," said Aragorn. "Our road leads beside it for many miles.
For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and first I hope to
come to the woods where the Silverlode flows into the Great River-out
yonder." They looked as he pointed, and before them they could see the
stream leaping down to the trough of the valley, and then running on and
away into the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden haze.

"And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain,"
said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. "It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I
have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf

"Nay, there was no change of counsel," said the Lady Galadriel speaking
for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman's
wont. "Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass the
borders of this land. Now tell us where he is; for I much desired to speak
with him again. But I cannot see him from afar, unless he comes within the
fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and
of his mind are hidden from me.’

"Alas! ' said Aragorn. "Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He remained
in Moria and did not escape."

"Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended," said Frodo.
’Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our escape
seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.’

"Alas! ' said Celeborn. "We long have feared that under Caradhras a
terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this evil in
Moria again, 1 would have forbidden you to pass the northern borders, you
and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one would say that at
the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net
of Moria."

"He would be rash indeed that said that thing," said Galadriel gravely.
"Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him
knew not his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be
with the guide, the followers are blameless. Do not repent of your welcome
to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long and far from Lothlurien, who
of the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not
wish

"Your quest is known to us," said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. "But we
will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe,
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed.
For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of
Middle-earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the power of kings. He has dwelt
in the West since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt with him years
uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the
mountains, and together through ages of the world we have fought the long
defeat.

’I it was who first summoned the White Council. And if my designs had
not gone amiss, it would have been governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then
mayhap things would have gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I
will not give you counsel, saying do this, or do that. For not in doing or
contriving, nor in choosing between this course and another, can I avail;
but only in knowing what was and is, and in part also what shall be. But
this I will say to you: your Quest stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray
but a little and it will fail, to the ruin of all. Yet hope remains while
all the Company is true.’

Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, and
all that each had known and seen of him came clear before their minds. As
they were healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew
more keen. Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that they
were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for they caught his name
among the sweet sad words that they could not understand.

"Well," said Sam, 'you can't see nobody working it. No fireworks like
poor Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don't see nothing of the Lord and
Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things,
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '

"I wouldn"t," said Frodo. "I am content. And I don't miss Gandalf's
fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice."

"It's the job that's never started as takes longest to finish, as my
old gaffer used to say. And I don't reckon that these folk can do much more
to help us, magic or no. It's when we leave this land that we shall miss
Gandalf worse, I'm thinking."

"I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent over
the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit land.
Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A long grey road
wound back out of sight. Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint
and small at first, but growing larger and clearer as it approached.
Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded him of Gandalf. He almost called
aloud the wizard’s name, and then he saw that the figure was clothed not in
grey but in white, in a white that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its
hand there was a white staff. The head was so bowed that he could see no
face, and presently the figure turned aside round a bend in the road and
went out of the Mirror's view. Doubt came into Frodo's mind: was this a
vision of Gandalf on one of his many lonely journeys long ago, or was it
Saruman?

"I would ask one thing before we go," said Frodo, 'a thing which I
often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear the One
Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts of those that
wear them? ’

"You have not tried,’ she said. "Only thrice have you set the Ring upon
your finger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try! It would destroy
you. Did not Gandalf tell you that the rings give power according to the
measure of each possessor? Before you could use that power you would need
to

"We have not decided our course,’ said Aragorn. ’Beyond Lothlurien I do
not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had
any clear purpose.’

His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go with
Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he believed that the
message of the dreams was a summons, and that the hour had come at last
when

the heir of Elendil should come forth and strive with Sauron for the
mastery. But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laid on him; and he
knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in the end to
go with Boromir. And yet what help could he or any of the Company give to
Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?

Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: "Would that
Gandalf were here! How my heart yearns for Minas Anor and the walls of my
own city! But whither now shall I go? ’

"Well, Frodo," said Aragorn at last. "I fear that the burden is laid
upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own way you
alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and
though I have tried to bear his part, I do not know what design or hope he
had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems that if he
were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate."

He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands, staring
eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo
left the Shire was passing through his mind, and he recalled and pondered
everything that he could remember of Gandalf s words. Time went on, and
still he was no nearer to a choice.

Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. "So you go on," he cried.
"Gandalf, Elrond — all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves
they may be right. These elves and half-elves and wizards, they would come
to grief perhaps. Yet often I doubt if they are wise and not merely timid.

"We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but the Lord
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond said was beyond
his power: either to keep the Burden secret, or to hold off the full might
of the Enemy when he comes to take it. Which way would any of us choose in
Frodo’s place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’

