Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told
it to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had promised to
give him a present, if he won the game; but when Gollum went to fetch it
from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the very
ring that he had found, and as he had won the game, it was already his by
right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum
show him the way out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the
original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts. But
many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived no doubt
from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually written by the old
hobbit himself.

The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies were
made, especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the
children of Master Samwise. The most important copy, however, has a
different history. It was kept at Great Smials, but it was written in
Condor, probably at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and
completed in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended this note:
Findegil, King's Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It is an exact copy
in all details of the Thain's Book m Minas Tirith. That book was a copy,
made at the request of King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and

No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly
known as the Gaffer. He held forth at The Ivy Bush , a small inn on the
Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden
at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before
that. Now that he was himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job
was mainly carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son
were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.

"Then you've heard more than I can speak to," answered the Gaffer. I
know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and there seems
no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel -making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came
back, a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I'd not long come
prentice to old Holman (him being my dad's cousin), but he had me up at Bag
End helping him to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the
garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up
the Hill with a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I
don't doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn't enough
to fill tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that. He's in and out
of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days he is, and he listens to all
Mr. Bilbo's tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters - meaning no harm,
mark you, and I hope no harm will come of it.

they do things proper at Bag End. Our Sam says that everyone's going to be
invited to the party, and there’s going to be presents, mark you, presents
for all - this very month as is."

That very month was September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or
two later a rumour (probably started by the knowledgeable Sam) was spread
about that there were going to be fireworks - fireworks, what is more, such
as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh on a century, not indeed since
the Old Took died.

Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire, and opposite him
was Ted Sandyman, the miller's son; and there were various other rustic
hobbits listening to their talk.

’Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure," said Sam.

"No doubt you can," retorted Sam, 'and I daresay there's more truth in
some of them than you reckon. Who invented the stories anyway? Take
dragons
now."

"All right," said Sam, laughing with the rest. "But what about these
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They do say that one bigger
than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back."

"All the same," said Sam, 'you can't deny that others besides our
Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire - crossing it, mind you:
there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders have never
been so busy before.

"And I've heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do say they are
going to the harbours, out away beyond the White Towers." Sam waved his
arm

"They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into
the West and leaving us," said Sam, half chanting the words, shaking his
head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed.

"Well I don't know," said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had once
seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day. Of all the
legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments of tales and
half-remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always
moved him most deeply. "There are some, even in these parts, as know the
Fair Folk and get news of them," he said. "There's Mr. Baggins now, that I
work for. He told me that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves.
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more: many's the talk I had with him when I was a
little lad."

Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think about. For
one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have
a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But
Sam had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up
and went out.

Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodo
had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the wizard would
never return and had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as
Sam was walking home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar
tap on the study window.

"How terrifying!" said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound
of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.

No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got up,
closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains. The room
became dark and silent, though the clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the
windows, could still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and removed the ring to
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped.

Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam's shears could now be
heard.

He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters.
Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sam passed along the path
outside whistling. "And now," said the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the
decision lies with you. But I will always help you." He laid his hand on
Frodo's shoulder. "I will help you bear this burden, as long as It is yours
to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving."

Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all was
very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the window.
Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long arm out and
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head
hauled by
one ear.

"Well, well, bless my beard!" said Gandalf. "Sam Gamgee is it? Now what
may you be doing?"

"Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!" said Sam. "Nothing! Leastways I was
just trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow me." He
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence.

"Mr. Frodo, sir!" cried Sam quaking. "Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't
let him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would take on so. I
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!"

"Well, sir," said Sam dithering a little. "I heard a deal that I didn't
rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir, and
dragons, and a fiery mountain, and - and Elves, sir. I listened because I
couldn't help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless me, sir, but I do
love tales of that sort. And I believe them too, whatever Ted may say.
Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them. Couldn't you take me to see
Elves, sir, when you go?"

Suddenly Gandalf laughed. "Come inside!" he shouted, and putting out
both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all,
right through the window and stood him on the floor. "Take you to see Elves,
eh?" he said, eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile flickering on his face.

"It can't be helped, Sam," said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized
that flying from the Shire would mean more painful partings than merely
saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. "I shall have to go.
But' - and here he looked hard at Sam - 'if you really care about me, you
will keep that dead secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of
what you've heard here, then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a spotted
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes."

Sam fell on his knees, trembling. "Get up, Sam!" said Gandalf. I have
thought of something better than that. Something to shut your mouth, and
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!"

"Me, sir!" cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk. "Me
go and see Elves and all! Hooray!" he shouted, and then burst into tears.

He looked at Frodo and smiled. "Very well," he said. "I think that will
do - but it must not be any later. I am getting very anxious. In the
mean-while, do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going!
And see that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him
into a toad."

"Rivendell!" said Frodo. "Very good: I will go east, and I will make
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted." He
spoke lightly; but his heart was moved suddenly with a desire to see the
house of Elrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep valley where
many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace.

As a matter of fact with Merry's help he had already chosen and bought
a little house at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all but
Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision
to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on the
eastern borders of the Shire, and as he had lived there in childhood his
going back would at least seem credible.

He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen. It had
been officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland 'to do for Mr.
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by
the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia
as a neighbour.

"Our last meal at Bag End!" said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They
left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam strapped up their three
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last stroll in the
garden. Sam disappeared.

"No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went
with

Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo
stepped inside the dark door. "Sam!" he called. "Sam! Time!"

"Coming, sir!" came the answer from far within, followed soon by Sam
himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the beer -barrel in
the cellar.

"All aboard, Sam?" said Frodo.

Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam. "Run
down with this to your home, Sam!" he said. "Then cut along the Row and meet
us as quick as you can at the gate in the lane beyond the meadows. We are
not going through the village tonight. Too many ears pricking and eyes
prying." Sam ran off at full speed.

At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to the gate
opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and adjusted the straps of
their packs. Presently Sam appeared, trotting quickly and breathing hard;
his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head
a tall shapeless fell bag, which he called a hat. In the gloom he looked
very much like a dwarf.

"I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light," said Sam
stoutly and untruthfully.

"No, you don't, Sam!" said Pippin. "It is good for him. He's got
nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll
feel the weight less when he's walked off some of his own."

I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into it
at our next packing." He picked up his stick again. "Well, we all like
walking in the dark," he said, 'so let's put some miles behind us before
bed."

"The wind's in the West," said Sam. "If we get to the other side of
this hill, we shall find a spot that is sheltered and snug enough, sir.

There is a dry fir-wood just ahead, if I remember rightly." Sam knew the
land well within twenty miles of Hobbiton, but that was the limit of his
geography.

"What's beautiful about it?" said Pippin, peering over the edge of his
blanket with one eye. "Sam! Gel breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have you
got the bath-water hot?"

Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. "No, sir, I haven't, sir!" he
said.

When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good fire going. "Water!"
shouted Pippin. "Where's the water?"

It is high time for lunch." He sat down on the bank at the side of the road
and looked away east into the haze, beyond which lay the River, and the end
of the Shire in which he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round
eyes were wide open - for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a
new horizon.

The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was on the
land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road.
This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little
traffic to the Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour or
more when Sam stopped a moment as if listening. They were now on level
ground, and the road after much winding lay straight ahead through
grass-land sprinkled with tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.

"I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind," said Sam.

"Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing," said Frodo to
himself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam had remained
flat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and
his strange behaviour.

"Begging your pardon," put in Sam suddenly, "I know where he comes
from. It's from Hobbiton that this here black rider comes, unless there's
more than one. And I know where he's going to."

"I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back to
our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me: Hello, Sam!
he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a
strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he's only just gone.
I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that Hiked the sound of him. He seemed
mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had left his old home for good.

"What about the smelling, sir?" said Sam. "And the Gaffer said he was a
black chap."

The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better
than the general darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a
large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. It
showed grey and pale, a line of fading light through the wood. Above it the
stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon.

"Elves!" exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. "Elves, sir!" He would have
burst out of the trees and dashed off towards the voices, if they had not
pulled him back.

"What about the Elves?" said Sam, too excited to trouble about the
rider. "Can't we go and see them?"

"O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope," said Pippin. Sam
was speechless. "I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion," said Frodo bowing.
"Elen snla l®menn' omentielvo, a star shines on the hour of our meeting," he
added in the high-elven speech.

They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faint
lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) could walk when they wished
without sound or footfall. Pippin soon began to feel sleepy, and staggered
once or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and
saved him from a fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a dream,
with an expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished joy.

Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, what
he felt or thought that night, though it remained in his memory as one of
the chief events of his life. The nearest he ever got was to say: "Well,
sir, if I could grow apples like that, I would call myself a gardener. But
it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean."

After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away
to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and slept the
rest of the night away. Sam refused to leave his master. When Pippin had
gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and
closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor.

"It is," said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to
Gandalf and my faithful Sam." He looked down at Sam, who was snoring
gently.

Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood. Pippin was
standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the Elves.

"They have left us fruit and drink, and bread," said Pippin. "Come and
have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. I
did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted."

Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. "What is the plan for
today?" asked Pippin.

"No! I could not!" he said to himself. "It is one thing to take my
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary,
and food and bed are sweet. To take them into exile, where hunger and
weariness may have no cure, is quite another - even if they are willing to
come. The inheritance is mine alone. I don't think I ought even to take
Sam." He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him.

"Well, Sam!" he said. "What about it? I am leaving the Shire as soon as
ever I can - in fact I have made up my mind now not even to wait a day at
Crickhollow, if it can be helped."

"It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. "It is already dangerous. Most
likely neither of us will come back."

"If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain," said Sam.

"Don't you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never mean to. I
am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon, and if any of those Black
Rulers try to stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with, I said. They
laughed."

"They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak," answered
Sam slowly. "It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quite
different from what I expected - so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it
were."

Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outward
sign of the odd change that seemed to have come over him. It did not sound
like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he knew. But it looked
like the old Sam Gamgee sitting there, except that his face was unusually
thoughtful.

longer ones. At all costs we must keep you away from the Golden Perch. We
want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?"

"I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo," said Sam (in spite of private
misgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).

Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the trees he caught a
glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down.

They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led the way, and
plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the stream. "Whew!" he said to
Pippin. "We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but we
got under cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear
anything coming?"

They stood still, almost holding their breath as they listened; but
there was no sound of pursuit. "I don't fancy he would try bringing his
horse down that bank," said Sam. "But I guess he knows we came down it. We
had better be going on."

Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam
and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly:

Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few paces. The gate
opened and three huge dogs came pelting out into the lane, and dashed
towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but
Sam shrank against the wall, while two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him
suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the
three halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling.

Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!" he cried. "Heel, Wolf!" To the relief of Frodo and
Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free.

the Golden Perch. Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural
mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not
disposed to be quick friends with anyone who had beaten his master, however
long ago.

"Then I'll tell you what to think," said Maggot. "You should never have
gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo. Folk are queer up
there." Sam stirred in his chair, and looked at the farmer with an
unfriendly eye. "But you were always a reckless lad. When I heard you had
left the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you
were going to find trouble. Mark my words, this all comes of those strange
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion in foreign

Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin
and Sam. The sun was already behind the western hills, and the light was
failing. Two of Maggot's sons and his three daughters came in, and a
generous supper was laid on the large table. The kitchen was lit with

It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The hobbits
wrapped themselves up, but their ears were strained for any sound above the
creak of the wheels and the slow clop of the ponies' hoofs. The waggon
seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him Pippin was nodding towards
sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog.

"You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam anxiously. "You get down
in the waggon and cover up with blankets, and we'll send this rider to the
rightabouts!" He climbed out and went to the farmer's side. Black Riders
would have to ride over him to get near the waggon.

"Hallo there!" called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped short.
They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist, a yard
or two ahead. "Now then!" said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and
striding forward. "Don't you come a step nearer! What do you want, and where
are you going?"

The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buckland shore drew
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his
old life lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched
his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone
on living quietly at Bag End.

The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it up, and
Pippin was already leading the pony up the path, when Sam (who had been
looking back, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper:

"Black figures riding on black horses," answered Pippin. "If Frodo
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning." He then gave
a full account of their journey from the time when they left Hobbiton. Sam
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.

"You do not understand!" said Pippin. "You must go - and therefore we
must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow, and
would jump down a dragon's throat to save you, if he did not trip over his
own feet; but you will need more than one companion in your dangerous
adventure."

’Step forward, Sam!" said Merry; and Sam stood up with a face scarlet
up to the ears. "Here's our collector of information ! And he collected a
lot, I can tell you, before he was finally caught. After which, I may say,
he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up."

"Sam!" cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further, and
quite unable to decide whether he felt angry, amused, relieved, or merely
foolish.

"Yes, sir!" said Sam. "Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant no wrong
to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He has some sense,
mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no! lake someone as you can
trust. '

"But it does not seem that I can trust anyone," said Frodo. Sam looked
at him unhappily. "It all depends on what you want," put in Merry. "You can
trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you
can trust us to keep any secret of yours - closer than you keep it yourself.

"And after all, sir," added Sam, 'you did ought to take the Elves'
advice. Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you can't deny
it."

"I don't deny it," said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. "I
don't deny it, but I'll never believe you are sleeping again, whether you
snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure.

"What is it!" cried Merry. "It is time to get up. It is half past four
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready. Even Pippin
is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch the one that is to be
the baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up and
see us off."

Frodo did not like the sound of this. "Come on!" he cried. "We can't
have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first." But the others were
too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.

Frodo lay for a while fighting with the sleep that was overpowering
him; then with an effort he struggled to his feel again. He felt a
compelling desire for cool water. "Wait for me, Sam," he stammered. "Must
bathe feet a minute."

Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern. He was
worried. The afternoon was getting late, and he thought this sudden
sleepiness uncanny. "There's more behind this than sun and warm air," he
muttered to himself. "I don't like this great big tree. I don't trust it.

He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to the edge,
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the jacket, and dragged him from under
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once
he woke, and coughed and spluttered.

"Do you know, Sam," he said at length, 'the beastly tree threw me in! I
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!"

"You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo," said Sam. "You shouldn't sit
in such a place, if you feel sleepy."

They went round to the other side of the tree, and then Sam understood
the click that he had heard. Pippin had vanished. The crack by which he had
laid himself had closed together, so that not a chink could be seen. Merry
was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside,
but the rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of which gripped
like a pair of pincers.

Frodo and Sam beat first upon the tree-trunk where Pippin had lain.

"I suppose we haven't got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?" asked
Sam.

"Wait a minute!" cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by firewood.

"We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with," said Sam
fiercely. "If it don't let them go, I'll have it down, if I have to gnaw
it." He ran to the ponies and before long came back with two tinder-boxes
and a hatchet.

Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of bark; and made
a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These they heaped against the
trunk on the far side of the tree from the prisoners. As soon as Sam had
struck a spark into the tinder, it kindled the dry grass and a flurry of
flame and smoke went up. The twigs crackled. Little fingers of fire licked
against the dry scored rind of the ancient tree and scorched it. A tremor
ran through the whole willow. The leaves seemed to hiss above their heads
with a sound of pain and anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell.

"Put it out! Put it out!" begged Merry. The branches of the willow
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading
outwards to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they
had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the river -valley and set up
ripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked at the
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of
why he did so, or what he hoped for, ran along the path crying help! help!
help! It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill
voice: it was blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a
clamour of leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate:
lost and witless.

Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both
stood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words (or so they
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song:

Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The leaves
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was another burst of song, and
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there appeared above the
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into view a man, or so it
seemed. At any rate he was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one,
slumping along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat
and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face was red
as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his
hands he carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white
water-lilies.

"Help!" cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their hands
stretched out.

"Master Merry's being squeezed in a crack!" cried Sam.

As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night in deep
content, if logs are contented.

wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam
was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley
seemed

he did so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony reared and snorted,
and he fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others
had not followed him. "Sam!" he called. "Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why
don't you keep up?"

There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the stones
shouting wildly: "Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!" The pony bolted into the mist
and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry:
"Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!" It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under the
great stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off in the
direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill.

As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all
at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish light was
growing round him. It did not at first show him what kind of a place he was
in, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself, and from the floor
beside him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He turned, and there
in the cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were
on their backs, and their faces looked deathly pale; and they were clad in
white. About them lay many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light
they looked cold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains
were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by
their sides, and shields were at their feet. But across their three necks
lay one long naked sword.

on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind
of passage which behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long arm
was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest, and
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him.

At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by the
incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He wondered if he
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find
some way out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, grieving
for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive himself. Gandalf would
admit that there had been nothing else he could do.

Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left the
barrow for the last time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still,
like a wounded spider, in a heap of fallen earth. Tom went back in again,
and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he
was

"Dressed up like this, sir?" said Sam. "Where are my clothes?" He flung
his circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly, as
if he expected to find his cloak, jacket, and breeches, and other
hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand.

Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare garments from
their packs; and they soon felt too hot, for they were obliged to put on
some of the thicker and warmer things that they had brought against the
oncoming of winter.

"I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil," said Sam. "He's a
caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a good deal further and see
naught better, nor queerer. But I won't deny I'll be glad to see this
Prancing Pony he spoke of. I hope it'll be like The Green Dragon away back
home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?"

The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few detached houses,
and drew up outside the inn. The houses looked large and strange to them.
Sam stared up at the inn with its three storeys and many windows, and felt
his heart sink. He had imagined himself meeting giants taller than trees,
and other creatures even more terrifying, some time or other in the course
of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of Men and
their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring
day. He pictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows.

"Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck," said Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My
name is Underhill."

They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer when Mr.
Butterbur and Nob came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid. There
was hot soup, cold meats, a blackberry tart, new loaves, slabs of butter,
and half a ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could show,
and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam's misgivings (already much
relieved by the excellence of the beer).

So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their supper
(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it
would be too stuffy. "I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit, and
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and don't
forget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret, and are still on the
high-road and not very far from the Shire!"

The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, and it did not at
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk could hardly beg for lodgings
in hobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and Pippin, who were now
feeling quite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in the Shire.
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the
roof of the Town Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the
fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out
like a floured dumpling. But there were several questions asked that made
Frodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been in
the Shire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who
they were related to.

The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang to their feet
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam,
who

Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no
light. Merry was not there, and the fire had burned low. It was not until
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting
in a chair by the door!

"Now, don't mistake me!" he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam
jumped up with a scowl. "I shall take more care of the secret than you do.

There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: "I ought to
have guessed it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us," he said. "And the
landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join the
company? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have
stayed quiet in here."

There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was confused
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master; and at last he
broke out:

Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam,
but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away.
"No," he said slowly. "I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as
you choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?
Who are you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how
do

Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. "That won't help you much; it
goes for most hobbits. Barley, he says to me," continued Mr. Butterbur with
a glance at Pippin. "But this one is taller than some and fairer than most,
and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your
pardon, but he said it, not me."

Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam.
"Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!" he said. "He deserves
roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in
Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he
was going into great danger."

Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed Strider
dubiously. "How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?"
he demanded. "You never mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You
might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with

"That you are a stout fellow," answered Strider; 'but I am afraid my
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I
could kill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk.

He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the
hilt of a sword that had hung concealed by his side. They did not dare to
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly.

"I did not know," he answered. "But I am Aragorn, and those verses go
with that name." He drew out his sword, and they saw that the blade was
indeed broken a foot below the hilt. "Not much use is it, Sam?" said
Strider. "But the time is near when it shall be forged anew."

Sam said nothing.

"Well," said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled.

"Weathertop?" said Sam. "What's that?"

Strider looked grave. "I do not know," he said. "I came west with him
in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire in the
last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We
last met on the first of May: at Sam Ford down the Brandywine. He told me
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for
Rivendell in the last week of September. As I knew he was at your side, I
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help.

"I can carry enough for two," said Sam defiantly.

They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd.
Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted. But
Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo;
next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony, which was
laden with as much of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; but
already it looked less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its
fortunes. Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of
them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. "Apples for walking, and a pipe

"Morning, Longshanks!" he said. "Off early? Found some friends at
last?" Strider nodded, but did not answer. "Morning, my little friends!" he
said to the others. "I suppose you know who you've taken up with? That's
Stick -at-naught Strider, that is! Though I've heard other names not so
pretty. Watch out tonight! And you, Sammie, don't go ill-treating my poor
old pony! Pah!" He spat again.

Sam turned quickly. "And you. Ferny," he said, 'put your ugly face out
of sight, or it will get hurt." With a sudden flick, quick as lightning, an
apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and
curses came from behind the hedge. "Waste of a good apple," said Sam
regretfully, and strode on.

"What do they live on when they can't get hobbit?" asked Sam,
scratching his neck.

The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost as
comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them) had been left
behind, the midges still pursued them.

The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up into
the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them with bright
unfriendly eyes. "You do make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!"
he said.

The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's.

"That's all I know," stammered Sam, blushing. "I learned it from Mr.

"There was a lot more," said Sam, 'all about Mordor. I didn't learn
that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way

On the western flank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow, at
the bottom of which there was a bowl -shaped dell with grassy sides. There
they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs and luggage. The
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the
crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last
slope had been steep and rocky.

Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small dell
and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring of clear water
in the hillside, and near it footprints not more than a day or two old. In
the dell itself they found recent traces of a fire, and other signs of a
hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell nearest to
the hill. Behind them Sam came upon a small store of firewood neatly
stacked.

"It is just as I feared," he said, when he came back. "Sam and Pippin
have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or confused. Rangers
have been here lately. It is they who left the firewood behind. But there
are also several newer tracks that were not made by Rangers. At least one
set was made, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot
now be certain, but I think there were many booted feet." He paused and
stood in anxious thought.

Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted
Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner Strider led
them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow with great dislike,
now that he had heard news of their enemies on the Road, only a few miles
away.

"Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once," answered Strider,
looking up and considering the time and the weather. "Well, Sam," he said at
last, "I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere
better that we could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight
for the moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen
spies. All we could do would be to go right out of our way back north on
this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is
here. The Road is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to
take cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles."

"Maybe," muttered Sam. "It is also as good a way of saying "here we
are" as I can think of, bar shouting."

"Then tell us some other tale of the old days," begged Sam; 'a tale
about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear more
about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close."

Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo and Pippin
remained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill
intently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping
over his heart, now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell.

Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his
companions; he was quaking as if he was bitter cold, but his terror was
swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. Fie did not forget
the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf; but something seemed to be
compelling him to disregard all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt
that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger. Fie could not speak. Fie
felt Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled
for a while; but resistance became unbearable, and at last he slowly drew
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand.

He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. His
three companions were bending over him. "What has happened? Where is the
pale king?" he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to
answer for a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he
gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes
coming towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He
heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the
grass with his sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and
lay him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now a good while
ago.

Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of the shadows. They
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down
swiftly at his side.

"I am not a Black Rider, Sam," he said gently, 'nor in league with
them. I have been trying to discover something of their movements; but I
have found nothing. I cannot think why they have gone and do not attack
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand."

"Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!" he said. Then he got up and
walked away, and called Sam to him. "I think I understand things better
now," he said in a low voice. "There seem only to have been five of the
enemy. Why they were not all here, I don't know; but I don't think they
expected to be resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not
far, I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape. They
are only waiting, because they think that their purpose is almost
accomplished, and that the Ring cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that

they believe your master has a deadly wound that will subdue him to their
will. We shall see!" Sam choked with tears. "Don't despair!" said Strider.

As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the greater
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo on the pony. In
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its new masters,
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must have been very hard for the
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life.

Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the borders of
the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but they found no sign of any
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see.

"What is the matter with my master?" asked Sam in a low voice, looking
appealingly at Strider. "His wound was small, and it is already closed.

'and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive
out. But do not give up hope, Sam!"

Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or rock-chamber
behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam, and
Merry pushing with all their strength managed to open the door a little
wider, and then Strider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on the
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen near the entrance
except some great empty jars and broken pots.

The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right again
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam and
Strider came behind, one on each side of Frodo's pony, for the path was now
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone
very far before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both
looked terrified.

Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared.

"Not since Weathertop," said Frodo. The others looked at him. "Don't
worry about me!" he added. "I feel much better, but I don't think I could
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory."

"Come on, Sam!" said Merry. "There's more stored in your head than you
let on about."

"I don't know about that," said Sam. "But how would this suit? It ain't
what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But
these old images here brought it to my mind." Standing up, with his hands
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune.

"Where did you come by that, Sam?" asked Pippin. "I've never heard
those words before."

Sam muttered something inaudible. "It's out of his own head, of
course," said Frodo. "I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.
First he was a conspirator, now he's a jester. He'll end up by becoming a
wizard - or a warrior!"

"I hope not," said Sam. "I don't want to be neither!"

While Glorfindel was speaking the shades of evening deepened. Frodo
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began to sink the
mist before his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a shadow was coming
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm.

"My master is sick and wounded," said Sam angrily. "He can't go on
riding after nightfall. He needs rest."

To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's
white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'
burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and for a time made good speed;
but the hobbits began to find it hard to keep up with the swift tireless
feet of the Elf. On he led them, into the mouth of darkness, and still on
under the deep clouded night. There was neither star nor moon. Not until the
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that

"Where's Sam?" Frodo asked at length. "And are the others all right?"

"Yes, they are all safe and sound," answered Gandalf. "Sam was here
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago."

"Yes," said Frodo, 'it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we
met Glorfindel."

Gandalf smiled. V I have heard all about Sam," he said. "He has no more
doubts now."

"Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves brought you
from this where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has
hardly left your side, day or night, except to run messages. Elrond is a
master of healing, but the weapons of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the
truth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last
night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply buried, and it was
working inwards."

At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came in. He ran
to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it gently
and then he blushed and turned hastily away.

"Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo.

"It's warm!" said Sam. "Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so
cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried, turning
round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. ’It's fine to see
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking."

"I can take you to them, sir," said Sam. "It's a big house this, and
very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what you'll
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there! Some like
kings, terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children. And the music
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place."

"I know what you have been doing, Sam," said Frodo, taking his arm.
"But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart's content. Come
on, guide me round the corners!"

Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out into a
high garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting
in a porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the
valley below, but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far
above. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling water was loud,
and the evening was filled with a faint scent of trees and flowers, as if

He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait
on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of
honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper
end of one of the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of
Strider.

"Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by
your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast' I don't go in for such
things much now. And I had something else to do."

In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious
of the mirth and music in the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of
himself. When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the
Road or in the country on either side; but somehow he had steered all the
time towards Ri vendell. "I got here without much adventure," he said, 'and
after a rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't
travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here I
have been. I have done this and that. I have written some more of my book.
And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to
please me, I think; for, of course, they aren't really good enough for
Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just
is. A remarkable place altogether.

of memory. The light and music of Rivendell was about him again. Bilbo
smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo
could tell-aided and corrected now and again by Sam-was of the greatest
interest to him, from the felling of the least tree to the pranks of the
smallest child in Hobbiton. They were so deep in the doings of the Four
Farthings that they did not notice the arrival of a man clad in dark green
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile.

Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen asleep. He
was alone and felt rather forlorn' although all about him the folk of
Rivendell were gathered. But those near him were silent, intent upon the
music of the voices and the instruments, and they gave no heed to anything
else. Frodo began to listen.

They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made for the
doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a smile on his face. In
spite of his delight in Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of regret as they
passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped over the threshold a
single clear voice rose in song.

At last there came a knock on the door. "Begging your pardon,’ said
Sam, putting in his head, 'but I was just wondering if you would be wanting
anything."

"And begging yours, Sam Gamgee," replied Bilbo. "I guess you mean that
it is time your master went to bed."

"Quite right, Sam," laughed Bilbo. "You can trot off and tell Gandalf
that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been good
to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good
talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to
see your chapters of our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I think, and
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!"

Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along
the terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun
rise above the far mountains, and shine down. Slanting through the thin
silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the woven
nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush. Sam walked beside him, saying
nothing, but sniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder
in his eyes at the great heights in the East. The snow was white upon their
peaks.

Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back
to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten, trotted
Sam.

"But you won't send him off alone surely, Master?" cried Sam, unable to
contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner where he had been
quietly sitting on the floor.

Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. "A nice pickle we have landed
ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his head.

Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room.
Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the
Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion.

"I don't wonder," said Merry, 'and I wish you could. But we are envying
Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment for any of us
to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a long way with you and
been through some stiff times. We want to go on."

"Well, anyway," said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor
Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I
was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the
reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?"

"Ah!" said Sam gloomily. "We'll just wait long enough for winter to
come."

"Ah!" said Sam. "And where will they live? That's what I often wonder."

"I do," said Frodo. "I will go with Sam."

In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall
of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren
and L®thien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry
and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo in
his own small room. Then Bilbo would read passages from his book (which
still seemed very incomplete), or scraps of his verses, or would take notes
of Frodo's adventures.

?he stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on him: he
was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. It was Sam who had
insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would pine,

"That animal can nearly talk," he said, 'and would talk, if he stayed
here much longer. He gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it:
if you don't let me go with you, Sam, I'll follow on my own." So Bill was
going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that
did not seem depressed.

Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staring moodily
into the gloom where the river roared stonily below; his desire for
adventure was at its lowest ebb.

Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in his
mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had forgotten
anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little box of salt
that he always carried and refilled when he could; a good supply of
pipe- weed (but not near enough, I'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen
hose: linen; various small belongings of his master's that Frodo had
forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in triumph when they were
called for. He went through them all.

"Rope!" he muttered. "No rope! And only last night you said to
yourself: "Sam, what about a bit of rope? You'll want it, if you haven't got
it:" Well, I'll want it. I can't get it now."

It was Sam’s turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined
him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even Sam felt it.

The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The swish of the
pony’s tail and the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam
could hear his own joints creaking, if he stirred. Dead silence was around

"What's that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud," said Sam in a
whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the sky;
but before long Sam could see for himself what was approaching. Flocks of
birds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all
the land as if they were searching for something; and they were steadily
drawing nearer.

"Lie flat and still!" hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shade
of a holly -bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from
the main host, and came, flying low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought
they were a kind of crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense
a throng that their shadow followed them darkly over the ground below, one
harsh croak was heard.

"Too warm, I shouldn't wonder," muttered Sam to Frodo. "But I'm
beginning to think it's time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain and saw
the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn,
or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke his piece. A fair
jaw-cracker dwarf-language must be!" Maps conveyed nothing to Sam's mind,
and all distances in these strange lands seemed so vast that he was quite
out of his reckoning.

"And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't you lad?" said Sam. The pony
looked at him mournfully.

"I don't like this at all," panted Sam just behind. "Snow's all right
on a fine morning, but I like to be in bed while it's falling. I wish this
lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there." Except on the
high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire, and was
regarded as a pleasant event and a chance for fun. No living hobbit (save

"Shelter!" muttered Sam. "If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof
make a house."

After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow but
now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli perched among
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane;
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled
down a fall of stones and slithering snow. The spray of it half blinded the
Company as they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again
they saw that the path was blocked behind them.

Pippin's face brightened visibly at the mere mention of return to
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But Aragorn and Boromir
made

"Then we must go on, if there is a way," said Frodo with a sigh. Sam
sank back into gloom.

"Nor me," muttered Sam.

The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. "I
do not wish to go," he said; 'but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of
Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slept on it.
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold
gloom. How the wind howls ! '

"I wish I had taken Elrond's advice," muttered Pippin to Sam. I am no
good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer
in me: these howls freeze my blood. I don't ever remember feeling so
wretched."

"My heart's right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin," said Sam. "But we
aren't etten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever may
be in store for old Gandalf, I'll wager it isn't a wolfs belly."

"What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin? ' said Sam, she/thing his sword.

"Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. "I had not thought of that. And poor Sam!

and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond of, if I had
had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.’

As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry ground on
the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a
fish had disturbed the still surface of the water. Turning quickly they saw
ripples, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great rings were
widening outwards from a point far out in the lake. There was a bubbling
noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the last gleams of the
sunset were veiled in cloud.

"But you can't leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place, Mr.
Gandalf! ' cried Sam, angry and distressed. "I won't have it, and that's
flat. After he has come so far and all ! '

"I am sorry, Sam," said the wizard. "But when the Door opens I do not
think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long dark of
Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.’

"He'd follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon's den, if I led him," protested
Sam. "It'd be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these
wolves about."

"There, Sam! He will have quite as much chance of escaping wolves and
getting home as we have.’

Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill, seeming to
understand well what was going on, nuzzled up to him, putting his nose to
Sam's ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled with the straps, unlading all
the pony's packs and throwing them on the ground. The others sorted out the
goods, making a pile of all that could be left behind, and dividing up the
rest.

At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening ears the
howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang to his side
and whispered softly to him.

He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. But at that
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by the ankle,
and he fell with a cry. Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped after
him, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran back again, weeping and cursing.
The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host
of snakes were swimming up from the southern end.

Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it was
pale-green and luminous and wet. Its fingered end had hold of Frodo's foot
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it
with a knife.

The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help.
Twenty others arms came rippling out. The dark water boiled, and there was a
hideous stench.

"Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick! ' shouted Gandalf leaping
back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to
the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.

They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up, and
Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed across
the narrow shore and fingered the cliff- wall and the doors. One came
wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned
and paused. If he was considering what word would close the gate again from
within, there was no need. Many coiling arms seized the doors on either
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo
they slammed, and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came
dully through the ponderous stone.

Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black
darkness. "Poor old Bill! ’ he said in a choking voice. "Poor old Bill!
Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to choose,
Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’

After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager
to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and were willing, tired as
they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf walked in
front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light
of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his
sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in the dim light
as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting
or of Glamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish
smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Ores
were near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and the
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked
Aragorn.

"Rope! ' muttered Sam. "I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it! '

"Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. "I wonder where he is. I hope those wolves
haven't got him yet."

"There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time ' said
Sam; 'and every one of them busier than badgers for five hundred years to
make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for? They
didn't live in these darksome holes surely? '

"I like that! ' said Sam. V I should like to learn it. In Moria, in
Khazad-dym ! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all those
lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still? '

"Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? ’ asked Sam.

fallen the rest fled shrieking, leaving the defenders unharmed, except for
Sam who had a scratch along the scalp. A quick duck had saved him; and he
had felled his ore: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A fire was
smouldering in his brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman step
backwards, if he had seen it.

hurled against the wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the
spear- shaft, and it broke. But even as the ore flung down the truncheon and
swept out his scimitar, And®ril came down upon his helm. There was a flash
like flame and the helm burst asunder. The ore fell with cloven head. His
followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them.

The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their
way down a long flight of steps, and then looked back; but they could see
nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer of the wizard's staff. He
seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed door. Frodo breathed
heavily and leaned against Sam, who put his arms about him. They stood
peering up the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear the
voice of Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with
a sighing echo. He could not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be
trembling. Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom,
doom.

They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door. Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage. Along
this they fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that
he himself was weeping as he ran. Doom, doom, doom the drum-beats rolled
behind, mournful now and slow; doom!

"Come with me, Frodo! ' cried the dwarf, springing from the road. "I
would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zvram." He ran down the long
green slope. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue water in spite
of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind.

"What did you see? ' said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too deep in
thought to answer.

For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the others; but
Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, and after a while they lagged
behind. They had eaten nothing since the early morning. Sam's cut was
burning like fire, and his head felt light. In spite of the shining sun the
wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt
every step more painful and he gasped for breath.

"I am sorry, Frodo! ' he cried, full of concern. "So much has happened
this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were
hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease
you,

While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of brush- and
fir-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was
not

’Good luck, Sam! ’ he said. "Many have received worse than this in
payment for the slaying of their first ore. The cut is not poisoned, as the
wounds of ore-blades too often are. It should heal well when I have tended
it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water."

When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They put out the
fire and hid all traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they took to
the road again. They had not gone far before the sun sank behind the
westward heights and great shadows crept down the mountain-sides. Dusk
veiled their feet, and mist rose in the hollows. Away in the east the
evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and
Frodo now feeling eased and greatly refreshed were able to go at a fair
pace, and with only one brief halt Aragorn led the Company on for nearly
three more hours.

"They're Elves," said Sam. "Can't you hear their voices? '

"Yes, they are Elves," said Legolas; 'and they say that you breathe so
loud that they could shoot you in the dark." Sam hastily put his hand over
his mouth. "But they say also that you need have no fear. They have been
aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and
knew that I was one of their Northern kindred, and therefore they did not
hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me
climb up with Frodo; for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of
our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep watch at the
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done."

Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of rope,
silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender it
proved strong enough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly up, and Frodo
followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches
of the mallorn-tree grew out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept
upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown of many boughs,

When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas seated with
three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-grey, and could not be seen
among the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of
them uncovered a small lamp that gave out a slender silver beam. He held it
up, looking at Frodo's face, and Sam's. Then he shut off the light again,
and spoke words of welcome in his elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in
return.

Then they wrapped themselves warmly, not only in the fur-cloaks of the
Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and tried to go to sleep. But
weary as they were only Sam found that easy to do. Hobbits do not like
heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet
was not at all to their liking as a bedroom. It had no walls, not even a
rail; only on one side was there a light plaited screen, which could be
moved and fixed in different places according to the wind.

"Once I do get to sleep,’ said Sam, ’i shall go on sleeping, whether I
roll off or no. And the less said, the sooner I'll drop off, if you take my
meaning."

Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars glinting
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his side long
before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see the grey forms of two
elves sitting motionless with their arms about their knees, speaking in
whispers. The other had gone down to take up his watch on one of the lower
branches. At last lulled by the wind in the boughs above, and the sweet
murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below, Frodo fell asleep with the song of
Legolas running in his mind.

When this slender bridge had been made, the Company passed over, some
cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of the hobbits Pippin proved the
best for he was sure-footed, and he walked over quickly, holding only with
one hand; but he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Sam
shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water
as if it was a chasm in the mountains.

He turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking round
with a puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as if he was not sure that
he was awake. "It's sunlight and bright day, right enough," he said. "I
thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than
anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside a song, if you take
my meaning."

And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence looked
searchingly at each of them in turn. None save Legolas and Aragorn could
long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head.

"What did you blush for, Sam? ’ said Pippin. "You soon broke down.
Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing
worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.’

"I never thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood for jest. ’If
you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing on, and I didn't like
it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me what I would do if she
gave me the chance of flying back home to the Shire to a nice little hole
with-with a bit of garden of my own."

and had not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things that
others had made before him. But now as he sat beside the fountain in Lurien
and heard about him the voices of the Elves, his thought took shape in a
song that seemed fair to him; yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam only
snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves.

"Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next! ' said Sam.

"Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you'll say a word
about his fireworks," said Sam. "Something like this:

"No, I'll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But-well. I
can't talk of it any more. I can't bear to think of bringing the news to
him."

One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool twilight.
Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the shadow of parting
had fallen: he knew somehow that the time was very near when he must leave
Lothlurien.

"What do you think of Elves now, Sam? ’ he said. "I asked you the same
question once before-it seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more
of them since then."

"I have indeed! ' said Sam. "And I reckon there's Elves and Elves.

"Well," said Sam, 'you can't see nobody working it. No fireworks like
poor Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don't see nothing of the Lord and
Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things,
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '

"You're right," said Sam. "And don't think I'm finding fault. I've
often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but
I've never heard of a better land than this. It's like being at home and on
a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don't want to leave. All

"I am afraid that's only too true, Sam," said Frodo. "Yet I hope very
much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again."

"And you? ’ she said, turning to Sam. "For this is what your folk would
call magic. I believe; though I do not understand clearly what they mean;

"I did," said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. Til
have a peep, Lady, if you're willing.’

Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin.

"There's only stars, as I thought," he said. Then he gave a low gasp,
for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had been withdrawn, the Mirror
grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches of trees
were waving and tossing in the wind. But before Sam could make up his mind
what it was that he saw, the light faded; and now he thought he saw Frodo
with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed
to see himself going along a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding
stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently for something,
but what it was he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went
back, and he saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and
he could see what was going on: they were not waving in the wind, they were
falling, crashing to the ground.

"Hi!" cried Sam in an outraged voice. "There's that Ted Sandyman
a-cutting down trees as he shouldn't. They didn't ought to be felled: it's
that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I wish I could
get at Ted, and I'd fell himV

But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large
red-brick building was being put up where it had stood. Lots of folk were
busily at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby. Black smoke seemed to
cloud the surface of the Mirror.

"There's some devilry at work in the Shire," he said. "Elrond knew what
he was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back." Then suddenly Sam
gave

Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. "I wish I had
never come here, and I don’t want to see no more magic,’ he said and fell
silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly, as if struggling with tears.

become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others. Yet
even so, as Ring-bearer and as one that has borne it on finger and seen that
which is hidden, your sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thought
more clearly than many that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that
holds the Seven and the Nine. And did you not see and recognize the ring
upon my finger? Did you see my ring? ’ she asked turning again to Sam.

Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats comforted him
much, not least because there would now be no need to decide his course for
some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead,
it seemed better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to
plod forward with bent backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still
thought boats as bad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that
he had survived made him think better of them.

Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir's glance, and he
looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final
words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said
something like this at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction
of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought
and made no sign that he had heeded Boromir's words. And so their debate
ended. Merry and Pippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The
night

"What are these? ' asked Sam, handling one that lay upon the
greensward.

"You don't need to tell me that! ' said Sam. I came without any and
I've been worried ever since. But I was wondering what these were made of,
knowing a bit about rope -making: it's in the family as you might say."

The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in
one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the third were
Legolas and Gimli, who had now become fast friends. In this last boat most
of the goods and packs were stowed. The boats were moved and steered with
short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all was ready
Aragorn led them on a trial up the Silverlode. The current was swift and
they went forward slowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and
looking back wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on the water
dazzled his eyes. As they passed beyond the green field of the Tongue, the
trees drew down to the river's brink. Here and there golden leaves tossed
and floated on the rippling stream. The air was very bright and still, and
there was a silence, except for the high distant song of larks.

"For you little gardener and lover of trees," she said to Sam, "I have
only a small gift.’ She put into his hand a little box of plain grey wood,
unadorned save for a single silver rune upon the lid. "Here is set G for
Galadriel," she said; 'but also it may stand for garden in your tongue. In
this box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing as Galadriel has
still to bestow is upon it. It will not keep you on your road, nor defend
you against any peril; but if you keep it and see your home again at last,
then perhaps it may reward you. Though you should find all barren and laid
waste, there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your
garden, if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember Galadriel,
and catch a glimpse far off of Lurien, that you have seen only in our
winter. For our spring and our summer are gone by, and they will never be
seen on earth again save in memory."

Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaudible, as he
clutched the box and bowed as well as he could.

Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well wrapped,
under tall grey -skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west
bank of the Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night away, and the grey
of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire
near at hand.

There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of these there
were many: small fowl whistling and piping in the reeds, but they were
seldom seen. Once or twice the travellers heard the rush and whine of
swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky.
"Swans! ' said Sam. "And mighty big ones too! ’

Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had seemed hostile
before, as if they harboured secret eyes and lurking dangers; now he wished
that the trees were still there. He felt that the Company was too naked,
afloat in little open boats in the midst of shelterless lands, and on a
river that was the frontier of war.

The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summer night in
some northern glade amid the beech- woods; Gimli was fingering gold in his
mind, and wondering if it were fit to be wrought into the housing of the
Lady's gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for
Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some
restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving
the boat close behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking
back, caught a queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo.
Sam had long ago made up his mind that, though boats were maybe not as
dangerous as he had been brought up to believe, they were far more
uncomfortable than even he had imagined. Fie was cramped and miserable,
having nothing to do but stare at the winter -lands crawling by and the grey
water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use they did not
trust Sam with one.

That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western bank. Sam
lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo. V I had a funny dream an hour or two
before we stopped, Mr. Frodo," he said. "Or maybe it wasn't a dream. Funny
it was anyway."

"Well, what was it? ' said Frodo, knowing that Sam would not settle
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. "I haven't seen or thought
of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlurien."

"That I won"t," said Sam. ' "Twas the eyes as made me sit up, so to
speak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half-light behind
Gimli's boat; but I didn't give much heed to it. Then it seemed as if the
log was slowly catching us up. And that was peculiar, as you might say,
seeing as we were all floating on the stream together. Just then I saw the
eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny -like, on a hump at the near end of the
log. What's more, it wasn't a log, for it had paddle-feet, like a swan's
almost, only they seemed bigger, and kept dipping in and out of the water.

"I said to myself: "dreaming again, Sam Gamgee," I said: and I said no
more just then. But I've been thinking since, and now I'm not so sure. What
do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? '

"I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleep in your
eyes Sam, said Frodo, if this was the first time that those eyes had been
seen. But it isn't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lurien. And
I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night. Haldir
saw it too. And do you remember the report of the Elves that went after the
ore-band? '

"Ah," said Sam. "I do; and I remember more too. I don't like my
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo's stories and
all, I fancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess. A nasty name.
Gollum, maybe? '

"That's about it," said Sam. "And we'd better be a bit more watchful
ourselves, or we'll feel some nasty fingers round our necks one of these
nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And that's what I was leading

In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to find Sam
shaking him. "It's a shame to wake you," whispered Sam, 'but that's what you
said. There's nothing to tell, or not much. I thought I heard some soft
plashing and a sniffing noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such
queer sounds by a river at night."

The weather was still grey and overcast, with wind from the East, but
as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and pools of faint
light, yellow and pale green, opened under the grey shores of cloud. There
the white rind of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote lakes.
Sam looked at it and puckered his brows.

To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watchman. He lay
forward peering into the gloom. The night grew dark, but the stars above
were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer On the face of the River. It
was close on midnight, and they had been drifting for some while, hardly
using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out. Only a few yards ahead dark
shapes loomed up in the stream and he heard the swirl of racing water. There
was a swift current which swung left, towards the eastern shore where the
channel was clear. As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now
very close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were
thrust out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth. The boats were all
huddled together.

and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell
back, foiled by his hidden coat of mail. Another passed through Aragorn's
hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by
Merry's hand. Sam thought he could glimpse black figures running to and fro
upon the long shingle -banks that lay under the eastern shore. They seemed
very near.

"Gollum's doing, I'll be bound." said Sam to Frodo. "And a nice place
to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! '

They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a hand.
Every moment they expected to feel the bite of black -feathered arrows. Many
whined overhead or struck the water nearby; but there were no more hits. It
was dark, but not too dark for the night-eyes of Ores, and in the
star-glimmer they must have offered their cunning foes some mark, unless it
was that the grey cloaks Of Lurien and the grey timber of the elf- wrought
boats defeated the malice of the archers of Mordor.

Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he were counting on his

"That should not have been said outside Lurien, not even to me," said
Aragorn. "Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land you lost your
count. There time flowed swiftly by us, as for the Elves. The old moon
passed, and a new moon waxed and waned in the world outside, while we
tarried there. And yestereve a new moon came again. Winter is nearly gone.
Time flows on to a spring of little hope.’

"I can't abide fog," said Sam; 'but this seems to be a lucky one. Now
perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us."

Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side. Far
off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed
over them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front muttering and
groaning: "What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of this
boat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! '

Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had been watching
his master with great concern, shook his head and muttered: "Plain as a
pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now."

Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while the
others restrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes of Boromir
followed Frodo intently, until he passed out of sight in the trees at the
foot of Amon Hen.

Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will was
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. T will do now what I
must," he said. This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at
work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does more
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can trust are too
dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen
into evil. I will go alone. At once."

"I must go now or I shall never go. I shan't get a chance again. I hate
leaving them, and like this without any explanation. But surely they will
understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?"

companions: Sam, who could not bear it otherwise; and Gimli; and myself.
Boromir will return to his own city, where his father and his people need
him; and with him the others should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin,
if Legolas is not willing to leave us."

"Begging your pardon," said Sam. "I don't think you understand my
master at all. He isn't hesitating about which way to go. Of course not!
What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your
pardon,

"Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried. "He's been a bit
queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's not in this business. He's off to
his home, as he always said; and no blame to him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows
he's got to find the Cracks of Doom, if he can. But he's afraid. Now it's
come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of
course he's had a bit of schooling, so to speak-we all have-since we left
home, or he'd be so terrified he'd just fling the Ring in the River and
bolt. But he's still too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us
either: whether we'll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That's
another thing that's bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he'll
want to go alone. Mark my words! We're going to have trouble when he
comes

"I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam," said Aragorn.
"And what shall we do, if you prove right? ’

"This is bad!" cried Sam, jumping up. "I don't know what this Man has
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn't ought to have;
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!"

"An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. "We must try and find him at
once. Come on! ’

It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off first.
Merry and Pippin had followed, and were already disappearing westward into
the trees by the shore, shouting: Frodo! Frodo ! in their clear, high
hobbit- voices. Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden panic or madness
seemed to have fallen on the Company.

Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as he
reached the little lawn among the rowans he overtook him, toiling uphill,
panting and calling, Frodo!

"Come with me, Sam! ’ he said. "None of us should be alone. There is
mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon Hen,
to see what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went
this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path.

Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and
soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead.
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head.

"Whoa, Sam Gamgee! ’ he said aloud. "Your legs are too short, so use
your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not his way; but he
hasn't told us everything. Something scared Mr. Frodo badly. He screwed
himself up to the point, sudden. He made up his mind at last to go. Where
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel
hard."

Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the tears. "Steady,
Gamgee! ' he said. "Think, if you can! He can't fly across rivers, and he
can't jump waterfalls. He's got no gear. So he's got to get back to the
boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning! '

Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up
he got and ran on. He came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen by the
shore, where the boats were drawn up out of the water. No one was there.
There seemed to be cries in the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He
stood gazing for a moment, stock-still, gaping. A boat was sliding down the

bank all by itself. With a shout Sam raced across the grass. The boat
slipped into the wat

"Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming! ' called Sam, and flung himself from the
bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a yard. With a cry
and a splash he fell face downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went
under, and the River closed over his curly head.

An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and
the boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam by the hair as he
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.

"Up you come, Sam my lad! ’ said Frodo. "Now take my hand! '

"Save me, Mr. Frodo! ’ gasped Sam. "I'm drownded. I can’t see your
hand.’

With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank, and Sam was
able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. Frodo took off the Ring and
stepped ashore again.

"Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ’ he said.

’Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard! ’ said Sam shivering. "That’s hard, trying
to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed right, where would you be
now? ’

"Safely! ’ said Sam. "All alone and without me to help you? I couldn’t
have a borne it, it’d have been the death of me.’

’It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,’ said Frodo and I
could not have borne that.’

"Not as certain as being left behind,’ said Sam.

"Now, Sam,’ said Frodo, 'don’t hinder me! The others will be coming
back at any minute. If they catch me here. I shall have to argue and

"Of course it is," answered Sam. "But not alone. I'm coming too, or
neither of us isn’t going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first."

"Just hold on a moment, and I'll get my stuff!" cried Sam eagerly.

"So all my plan is spoilt! ’ said Frodo. "It is no good trying to
escape you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them
again."

"Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may," said Sam.

So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo
paddled away from the shore, and the River bore them swiftly away, down the
western arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the
great falls drew nearer. Even with such help as Sam could give, it was hard
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive
the boat eastward towards the far shore.

