"Him?" said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking an eye
without turning his head. "I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare
tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he
pops up again. He was in and out pretty often last spring; but I haven't
seen him about lately. What his right name is I've never heard: but he's
known round here as Strider. Goes about at a great pace on his long shanks;
though he don't tell nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there's no
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should ask about him." But at
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away by a demand for more ale and his
last remark remained unexplained.

Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had heard or
guessed all that had been said. Presently, with a wave of his hand and a
nod, he invited Frodo to come over and sit by him. As Frodo drew near be
threw back his hood, showing a shaggy head of dark hair necked with grey,
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes.

"I am called Strider," he said in a low voice. "I am very pleased to
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right."

"Well, Master Underhill," said Strider, 'if I were you, I should stop
your young friends from talking too much. Drink, fire, and chance -meeting
are pleasant enough, but, well - this isn't the Shire. There are queer folk
about. Though I say it as shouldn't, you may think," he added with a wry

Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no further
sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be fixed on Pippin. To his alarm
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success
with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance.

"You had better do something quick!" whispered Strider in his ear.

the tables to the dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall and took off the Ring. How
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he
had been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and that somehow it had
slipped on when he stuck out his hand with a jerk to save his fall. For a
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out.

"Well?" said Strider, when he reappeared. ’Why did you do that? Worse
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or
should I say your finger?"

"Oh yes, you do," answered Strider; 'but we had better wait until the
uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. Baggins, I should like a
quiet word with you."

"A matter of some importance - to us both," answered Strider, looking
Frodo in the eye. "You may hear something to your advantage."

"Of course there's a mistake!" said Frodo. "I haven't vanished. Here I
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer."

Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall.

Chapter 10. Strider

Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no
light. Merry was not there, and the fire had burned low. It was not until
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting
in a chair by the door!

"I am called Strider," he answered: 'and though he may have forgotten
it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me."

"Several things," answered Strider. "But, of course, I have my price."

"No more than you can afford," answered Strider with a slow smile, as
if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. "Just this: you must take me along with you,
until I wish to leave you."

"Excellent!" exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting back
comfortably. "You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you
what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, when
you have heard me."

"Too much; too many dark things," said Strider grimly. "But as for your
business — ' He got up and went to the door, opened it quickly and looked
out. Then he shut it quietly and sat down again. "I have quick ears," he
went on, lowering his voice, 'and though I cannot disappear, I have hunted

"I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree," said Frodo
angrily, 'and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr. Strider may
have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but if so, I should
advise him to explain it."

"Well answered!" said Strider laughing. "But the explanation is simple:

"It would have been better," said Strider. "I would have stopped your
going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me
in to see you, or take a message."

"No, I don't think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does not
altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort." Frodo gave him a puzzled
look. "Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?" said Strider with a
curl of his lip and a queer gleam in his eye. "But I hope we shall get to

"I wonder," said Strider. "Accident, then. That accident has made your
position dangerous."

"You must not count on that!" said Strider sharply. "They will return.

"What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?"
said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints.

"News of you, of course," answered Strider. "An account of your
performance would be very interesting to certain people. After that they
would hardly need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely
that they will hear of it before this night is over. Is that enough? You can
do as you like about my reward: take me as a guide or not. But I may say
that I know all the lands between the Shire and the Misty Mountains, for I
have wandered over them for many years. I am older than I look. I might
prove useful. You will have to leave the open road after tonight; for the
horsemen will watch it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and be
allowed to go forward while the Sun is up; but you won't go far. They will
come on you in the wild, in some dark place where there is no help. Do you
wish them to find you? They are terrible!"

"There!" he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across his brow.
"Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do. You fear them, but
you do not fear them enough, yet. Tomorrow you will have to escape, if you
can. Strider can take you by paths that are seldom trodden. Will you have
him?"

"With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I'd say no! This Strider here, he warns
and he says take care; and I say yes to that, and let's begin with him. He
comes out of the Wild, and I never heard no good of such folk. He knows
something, that's plain, and more than I like; but it's no reason why we
should let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he
puts it."

Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam,
but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away.
"No," he said slowly. "I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as
you choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?
Who are you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how
do

"The lesson in caution has been well learned," said Strider with a grim
smile. "But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get
to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You must
make up your mind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will help
you to do so. But why should you believe my story, if you do not trust me
already? Still here it is '

At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterbur had
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider
withdrew into a dark corner.

called it. Nob, he came and told me that two black men were at the door
asking for a hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid
the black fellows be off, and slammed the door on them; but they've been
asking the same question all the way to Archet, I hear. And that Ranger,
Strider, he's been asking questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you,
before you'd had bite or sup, he did."

"Fie did!" said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light. "And
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman."

"Well, you know your own business, maybe," said Mr. Butterbur, looking
suspiciously at Strider. "But if I was in your plight, I wouldn't take up
with a Ranger."

"Then who would you take up with?" asked Strider. "A fat innkeeper who

"They come from Mordor," said Strider in a low voice. "From Mordor,
Barliman, if that means anything to you."

"Against the Shadow in the East," said Strider quietly. "Not much,
Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here
tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the name of Baggins, till he
is far away."

"Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on
a holiday!" said Butterbur. "I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see
your friend is let in when he comes. I'd better send Nob to look for him.
Good night to you all!" At last Mr. Butterbur went out, with another
doubtful look at Strider and a shake of his head. His footsteps retreated
down the passage.

"Well?" said Strider. "When are you going to open that letter?" Frodo
looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to be
Gandalf s. Inside, written in the wizard's strong but graceful script, was
the following message:

Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had better
leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end of July at
latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I find
that you are gone. Leave a message for me here, if you pass through Bree.
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business
and will help you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I
do not come, Elrond will advise you.

PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn.

"He has been doing that for many years," said Strider.

"Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?" said Strider.

"It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering
in the Wild to make you look like Strider," he answered. "And you would die
first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be."

Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed Strider
dubiously. "How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?"
he demanded. "You never mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You
might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with

you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have
you to say to that?"

"That you are a stout fellow," answered Strider; 'but I am afraid my
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I
could kill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk.

"But I am the real Strider, fortunately," he said, looking down at them
with his face softened by a sudden smile. "I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and
if by life or death I can save you, I will."

"I see," laughed Strider. "I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? All
that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost '

"I did not know," he answered. "But I am Aragorn, and those verses go
with that name." He drew out his sword, and they saw that the blade was
indeed broken a foot below the hilt. "Not much use is it, Sam?" said
Strider. "But the time is near when it shall be forged anew."

"Well," said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled.

Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we
are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it
unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the
pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop."

Strider looked grave. "I do not know," he said. "I came west with him
in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire in the
last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We
last met on the first of May: at Sam Ford down the Brandywine. He told me
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for
Rivendell in the last week of September. As I knew he was at your side, I
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help.

"I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except
the Enemy himself," said Strider. "But do not give up hope ! Gandalf is
greater than you Shire-folk know - as a rule you can only see his jokes and
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task."

"Which way did it go?" asked Strider, suddenly and sharply. Merry
started, noticing the stranger for the first time. "Go on!" said Frodo.

Strider looked at Merry with wonder. "You have a stout heart," he said;

"I do," said Strider. "The Black Breath. The Riders must have left
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They
will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before

"What will happen?" said Merry. "Will they attack the inn?" "No, I
think not," said Strider. "They are not all here yet. And in any case that
is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not
openly attack a house where there are lights and many people -not until they
are desperate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before
us. But their power is in terror, and already some in Bree are in their
clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of
the strangers, and, maybe, the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when
they

While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that
had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and pondering Gandalf's
letter when Strider and Nob returned.

"We shall see," said Strider. "Fet us hope to hold the fort till
morning."

Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They pushed a low
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo saw that the
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred the heavy inside shutters and drew the
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.

The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards the
hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They

"I hope so," said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one by one
the hobbits dropped off to sleep.

In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, as if some
sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert
in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the fire, which had been
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement.

He opened his eyes, and heard a cock crowing lustily in the inn-yard.
Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang.

As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to their
bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice:
the windows had been forced open and were swinging, and the curtains were
flapping; the beds were tossed about, and the bolsters slashed and flung
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces.

Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr. Butterbur
looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he
said), but he had never heard a sound.

"Dark times," said Strider. "But for the present you may be left in
peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about
breakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be packed
in a few minutes."

Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach Rivendell
on foot, pursued by mounted enemies? They might as well set out for the
Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was
weighing up their strength and courage.

"Yes," said Strider reluctantly, 'you had better do that. I am afraid
we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so ends all hope of
starting early, and slipping away quietly! We might as well have blown a
horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt."

"I wonder," said Strider. "But I cannot imagine any animal running home
to him, once it got away. I fancy this is only an afterthought of kind
Master Ferny's: just a way of increasing his profits from the affair. The
chief danger is that the poor beast is probably at death's door. But there
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?"

After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get together
further supplies for the longer journey they were now expecting. It was
close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By that time the whole of
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of
the black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that
Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as
would last for many uneventful years. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and
Staddle, and many even from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road
to

Strider had changed his mind, and he decided to leave Bree by the main
road. Any attempt to set off across country at once would only make matters
worse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to see what they were up to,
and to prevent them from trespassing.

They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd.
Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted. But
Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo;
next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony, which was
laden with as much of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; but
already it looked less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its
fortunes. Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of
them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. "Apples for walking, and a pipe

"Morning, Longshanks!" he said. "Off early? Found some friends at
last?" Strider nodded, but did not answer. "Morning, my little friends!" he
said to the others. "I suppose you know who you've taken up with? That's
Stick -at-naught Strider, that is! Though I've heard other names not so
pretty. Watch out tonight! And you, Sammie, don't go ill-treating my poor
old pony! Pah!" He spat again.

After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill standing
tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards the
North. "This is where we leave the open and take to cover," said Strider.

"Ah, but you had not got me with you then," laughed Strider. "My cuts,
short or long, don't go wrong." He took a look up and down the Road. No one
was in sight; and he led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley.

His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the
country, was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on
the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands to
Weathertop Hill. In that way they would, if all went well, cut off a great
loop of the Road, which further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater
Marshes. But, of course, they would have to pass through the marshes
themselves, and Strider's description of them was not encouraging.

However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. Indeed, if it
had not been for the disturbing events of the night before, they would have
enjoyed this pan of the journey better than any up to that time. The sun was
shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and
full of colour, and seemed peaceful and wholesome. Strider guided them
confidently among the many crossing paths, although left to themselves they
would soon have been at a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many
turns and doublings, to put off any pursuit.

Whether because of Strider's skill or for some other reason, they saw
no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing all that day: neither
two-footed, except birds; nor four-footed, except one fox and a few
squirrels. The next day they began to steer a steady course eastwards; and
still all was quiet and peaceful. On the third day out from Bree they came
out of the Chetwood. The land had been falling steadily, ever since they
turned aside from the Road, and they now entered a wide flat expanse of
country, much more difficult to manage. They were far beyond the borders of
the Bree-land, out in the pathless wilderness, and drawing near to the
Midge- water Marshes.

"What is the light?" he said to Strider, who had risen, and was
standing, gazing ahead into the night.

"I do not know," Strider answered. "It is too distant to make out. It
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops."

Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white
flashes, and against them the tall dark figure of Strider, standing silent
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.

"That is Weathertop," said Strider. "The Old Road, which we have left

The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up into
the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them with bright
unfriendly eyes. "You do make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!"
he said.

"I think," answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure, "I
think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can, to
make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I
know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north
and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see."

backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did
not sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night -hours a cold
grey light lay on the land.

"Do not speak of such things!" said Strider quickly, and with
surprising earnestness.

"No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,"
answered Strider. "The Men of the West did not live here; though in their
latter days they defended the hills for a while against the evil that came

The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned in old
lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. "Who was Gil-galad?" asked Merry;
but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low
voice murmured:

"He did not make it up," said Strider. "It is pan of the lay that is
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have
translated it. I never knew that."

"Do not speak that name so loudly!" said Strider.

On the western flank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow, at
the bottom of which there was a bowl -shaped dell with grassy sides. There
they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs and luggage. The
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the
crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last
slope had been steep and rocky.

On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancient
stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a
cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as if with fire.
About them the turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the
grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but
there was no sign of any living thing.

"I wonder," said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. "Even if he was a
day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first. He can ride

"The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches," said
Strider. "It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The
scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean
something quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use
runes, and they come here sometimes."

"I should say," answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and were a
sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now.

"Perhaps," said Strider. "For myself, I believe that he was here, and
was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that
we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess
that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell.

"I don't know if the Road has ever been measured in miles beyond the
Forsaken Inn, a day's journey east of Bree," answered Strider. "Some say it
is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road, and folk are glad
to reach their journey's end, whether the time is long or short. But I know
how long it would take me on my own feet, with fair weather and no ill
fortune twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses
the Loudwater that runs out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight's
journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road."

"It may," said Strider.

In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully realized his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in
the quiet and beloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful Road, leading
back westward - to his home. Suddenly he was aware that two black specks
were moving slowly along it, going westward; and looking again he saw that
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched
Strider's arm.

At once Strider flung himself on the ground behind the ruined circle,
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside.

"I do not know, but I fear the worst," answered Strider.

"Yes," said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. "The
enemy is here!"

Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. "I wish I had
waited and explored the ground down here myself," he said, hurrying off to

Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted
Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner Strider led
them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow with great dislike,
now that he had heard news of their enemies on the Road, only a few miles
away.

"Hadn't we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?" he asked impatiently.

"Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once," answered Strider,
looking up and considering the time and the weather. "Well, Sam," he said at
last, "I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere
better that we could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight
for the moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen
spies. All we could do would be to go right out of our way back north on
this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is
here. The Road is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to
take cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles."

"I was too careless on the hill-top," answered Strider. "I was very
anxious to find some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us
to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see, and the
Riders can use men and other creatures as spies, as we found at Bree. They
themselves do not see the world of light as we do, but our shapes cast
shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun destroys; and in the dark
they perceive many signs and forms that are hidden from us: then they are

Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. "There is still hope," he said.

"There is food in the wild," said Strider; 'berry, root, and herb; and
I have some skill as a hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving
before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work,
and we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables
of Elrond's house!"

shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling
stars. Frodo and his companions huddled round the fire, wrapped in every
garment and blanket they possessed; but Strider was content with a single
cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe.

"I do indeed," answered Strider. "So also does Frodo, for it concerns
us closely." Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring into the
fire.

"No!" said Strider interrupting, "I do not think that tale should be
told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through to the
house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full."

"I will tell you the tale of Tin®viel," said Strider, 'in brief - for
it is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now,
except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a fair
tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may
lift up your hearts." He was silent for some time, and then he began not to
speak but to chant softly:

Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. ’That is a song," he
said, 'in the mode that is called ann-thennath among the Elves, but is hard
to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tells
of the meeting of Beren son of Barahir and L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was a
mortal man, but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol, a King of Elves upon
Middle-earth when the world was young; and she was the fairest maiden that
has ever been among all the children of this world. As the stars above the
mists of the Northern lands was her loveliness, and in her face was a
shining light. In those days the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was
but a servant, dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West
coming back to Middle-earth made war upon him to regain the Silmarils which
he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the Enemy was
victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping through great peril
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the
forest of Neldoreth. There he beheld L®thien singing and dancing in a glade
beside the enchanted river Esgalduin; and he named her Tin®viel, that is
Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and
they were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from the dungeons of Sauron,
and together they passed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great
Enemy from his throne, and took from his iron crown one of the three
Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the bride-price of L®thien to
Thingol her father. Yet at the last Beren was slain by the Wolf that came
from the gates of Angband, and he died in the arms of Tin®viel. But she
chose mortality, and to die from the world, so that she might follow him;
and it is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering Seas, and after a
brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed,
long ago, beyond the confines of this world. So it is that L®thien Tin®viel
alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left the world, and they have
lost her whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of
old descended among Men. There live still those of whom L®thien was the
foremother, and it is said that her line shall never fail. Elrond of
Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren and L®thien was born Dior Thingol’s
heir; and of him Elwing the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril
upon his brow. And of Edrendil came the Kings of N®menor, that is
Westernesse."

As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit

Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo and Pippin
remained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill
intently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping
over his heart, now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell.

"Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!" cried Strider. "Get
some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!"

"Hush!" whispered Strider. "What's that?" gasped Pippin at the same
moment.

At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and he heard
himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at
the feet of his enemy. A shrill cry rang out in the night; and he felt a
pain like a dart of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Strider leaping

He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. His
three companions were bending over him. "What has happened? Where is the
pale king?" he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to
answer for a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he
gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes
coming towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He
heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the
grass with his sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and
lay him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now a good while
ago.

Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of the shadows. They
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down
swiftly at his side.

they believe your master has a deadly wound that will subdue him to their
will. We shall see!" Sam choked with tears. "Don't despair!" said Strider.

Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and a
deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side. His
friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound. The night
passed slowly and wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky, and the dell was
filling with grey light, when Strider at last returned.

"And more deadly to Frodo was this!" He stooped again and lifted up a
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw
that near the end its edge was notched and the point was broken off. But
even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only
the hilt in Strider's hand. "Alas!" he cried. "It was this accursed knife
that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in healing to match such evil
weapons. But I will do what I can."

The others were discussing this very question. They quickly decided to
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. "I think now," said Strider, 'that the
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here,
then he must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. In any
case we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night,
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go."

They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the
Road, but. it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed
fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm, especially at night,
while fire would be some protection for them all. It was also his plan to
shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: east
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards.

their backs bowed under their burdens. Even Strider seemed tired and
heavy-hearted.

At the end of the fifth day the ground began once more to rise slowly
out of the wide shallow valley into which they had descended. Strider now
turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached
the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle of wooded
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round the feet of
the hills; and to their right a grey river gleamed pale in the thin
sunshine. In the distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley
half-veiled in mist.

"I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while," said
Strider. "We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves call
Mitheithel. It flows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells north of
Rivendell, and joins the Loud water away in the South. Some call it the
Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the Sea. There is
no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last

"That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell," answered Strider. "The
Road runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the
Ford of Bruinen. But I have not yet thought how we shall cross that water.
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last
Bridge held against us."

Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the borders of
the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but they found no sign of any
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see.

They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope.
They dreaded to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider
made them take cover in a thicket at the side of the Road, while he went
forward to explore.

At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in safety, hearing
no sound but the water swirling against its three great arches. A mile
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the
steep lands on the left of the Road. Here Strider turned aside, and soon
they were lost in a sombre country of dark trees winding among the feet of
sullen hills.

"No!" said Strider. "Trolls do not build. No one lives in this land.

"The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past," said Strider;

'and many more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell." "Have
you often been to Rivendell?" said Frodo. "I have," said Strider. "I dwelt
there once, and still I return when I may.

course. Strider seemed to be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out
from Weathertop, and their stock of provisions was beginning to run low. It
went on raining.

That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock -wall behind them,
in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff. Frodo was
restless. The cold and wet had made his wound more painful than ever, and
the ache and sense of deadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks
of rock, water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling fall of a loosened
stone. He felt that black shapes were advancing to smother him; but when he
sat up he saw nothing but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking
his pipe, and watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream,
in which he walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire, but it seemed
faint and dim, less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking
over the hedge.

In the morning he woke to find that the rain had stopped. The clouds
were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale strips of blue appeared
between them. The wind was shifting again. They did not start early.
Immediately after their cold and comfortless breakfast Strider went off
alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he
came back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie
of the land.

"We cannot go any further," said Merry to Strider. "I am afraid this
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we
to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him in Ri vendell, if we ever
get there?"

"We shall see," answered Strider. "There is nothing more that I can do
in the wilderness; and it is chiefly because of his wound that I am so
anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight."

"What is the matter with my master?" asked Sam in a low voice, looking
appealingly at Strider. "His wound was small, and it is already closed.

"Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy," said Strider,

The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, and the light
pale and clear in a rain- washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey
longed for the sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light,
Strider took Merry with him and went to survey the country from the height
to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining brightly when he
returned with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the
right direction. If they went on, down the further side of the ridge, they
would have the Mountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider had caught a
glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from

Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or rock-chamber
behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam, and
Merry pushing with all their strength managed to open the door a little
wider, and then Strider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on the
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen near the entrance
except some great empty jars and broken pots.

"There is no need, I think," said Strider, coining out. "It is
certainly a troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken. I don't
think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see."

The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right again
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam and
Strider came behind, one on each side of Frodo's pony, for the path was now
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone
very far before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both
looked terrified.

"We will come and look at them," said Strider, picking up a stick.

Strider walked forward unconcernedly. "Get up, old stone!" he said, and
broke his stick upon the stooping troll.

"You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew
about trolls," said Strider. "It is broad daylight with a bright sun, and
yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale of live trolls waiting for

"Well, that's a warning to us all!" laughed Merry. "It is as well you
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!"

the Mountains. Not far down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the
grass. On it roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen
dwarf-runes and secret marks.

That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!" said Frodo, listening
intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not, but they all
remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of pursuit for so long
that any sound from behind seemed ominous and unfriendly. But Strider was
now leaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his ear, and a
look of joy on his face.

Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road, leaping
with a cry through the heather; but even before he had moved or called, the
rider had reined in his horse and halted, looking up towards the thicket
where they stood. When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him
calling out: Ai na vedui D®nadan! Mae govannen! His speech and clear
ringing

seemed to be a note of haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was
now speaking quickly and urgently to Strider.

Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the bushes and
hurried down to the Road. "This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of
Elrond," said Strider.

Briefly Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop, and
of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it
to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he took it, but he looked intently at
it.

time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by the
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream.

They had rested rather less than five hours when they took to the Road
again. Glorfindel still urged them on, and only allowed two brief halts
during the day's march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before
nightfall, and came to a point where the Road bent right and ran down
towards the bottom of the valley, now making straight for the Bruinen. So
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or
hear; but often Glorfindel would halt and listen for a moment, if they
lagged behind, and a look of anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue.

The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down the slope.
Glorfindel and Strider followed as rear -guard. They were only half way
across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of
the gate in the trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined
his horse in, and halted, swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and
then another; then again two more.

"We should never have done it without Strider," said Frodo. "But we
needed you. I did not know what to do without you."

"Yes," said Frodo, 'it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we
met Glorfindel."

"I am glad," said Frodo. "For I have become very fond of Strider. Well,
fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he is strange,
and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I didn't know that
any of the Big People were like that. I thought, well, that they were just
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked
like Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except
perhaps the Breelanders."

"Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old
Kings?" said Frodo in wonder. "I thought they had all vanished long ago. I
thought he was only a Ranger."

Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that
had vanished in Strider's hands. "Don't be alarmed!" said Gandalf. "It is
gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very
reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would
quickly have been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen
days.’

"Splendid!" said Frodo. "It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble
and show me so much kindness.’

He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait
on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of
honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper
end of one of the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of
Strider.

"Strider!" said Frodo. "You seem to have a lot of names."

"Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway," said Bilbo.

"They call me that in Bree,’ said Strider laughing, 'and that is how I
was introduced to him."

' The D®nadan," said Bilbo. "Fie is often called that here. But I thought
you knew enough Elvish at least to know d®n-udan: Man of the West,
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!’ He turned to Strider.

Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. "I know," he said. "But often I
must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wild
unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once."

Strider smiled. "Come then!" he said. "Fet me hear it!’

Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence about him.
Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gluin; and in a corner alone Strider was sitting,
clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by

"And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at us, and
countrymen give us scornful names. "Strider" I am to one fat man who lives
within a day's march of foes that would freeze his heart or lay his little
town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would not have it
otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple they will be,
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred,
while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown.

Gandalf laughed. "Don't be afraid!" he said. "I did not bite, and I
barked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of him,
when he stopped quaking, that I embraced the old fellow. How it happened I
could not then guess, but I learned that you had been in Bree the night
before, and had gone off that morning with Strider.

' "Strider! " I cried, shouting for joy.

So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the
window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat and bowed. "I
only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me,
I want to see Elrond. I must be off."

"Strider!" said Frodo.

"What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ’What are you looking
for? Do you miss the East Wind?’

"What's that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud," said Sam in a
whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the sky;
but before long Sam could see for himself what was approaching. Flocks of
birds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all
the land as if they were searching for something; and they were steadily
drawing nearer.

"There!" said Merry panting. "We have lugged up your blankets as well
as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of the baggage in a deep drift
of leaves.’

up to. No need to trouble Strider or the others tonight. I'll keep watch. I
can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say."

"Fear not!" said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned and saw
Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no longer
there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding
the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was
blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to
his own land.

Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will was
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. T will do now what I
must," he said. This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at
work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does more
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can trust are too
dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen
into evil. I will go alone. At once."

Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and
soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead.
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head.

"So all my plan is spoilt! ’ said Frodo. "It is no good trying to
escape you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them
again."

